Title: Gut-derived metabolic reprogramming drives immune aging and tissue degeneration

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 59

Markdown Content:
1

Gut -derived metabolic reprogramming drives immune aging and tissue degeneratio n

Sayan Ghosh 1*, Victoria Koontz 2#, Ying Xin 1#, Sridhar Bammidi 1#, Dominique Meyer 3, Haochen Wang 3,

Vishnu Suresh Babu 1, Puja Dutta 1, Durgadas Cherukaraveedu 1, 4, Shreevadsaa A. Mohanakrishnan 1, 4,5 ,

Anupam K. Mondal 6, Jagannath Das 7, Jenny Nguyen 8, Avinash Soundararajan 9, Idris A. Adekale 9,

Dulal Bhaumik 7,10 , Stacey Hose 1, Sheldon Rowan 11 , Padmanabhan P. Pattabiraman 9,

Rangaramanujam M. Kannan 1, 4,5 , James T. Handa 1, Ji Yi 1,3 , Srinivasa R. Sripathi 6,12 , Jiang Qian 1,

Debasish Sinha 1*

> 1

Wilmer Eye Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, 

USA; 2Department of Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, 

Pennsylvania, USA; 3Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Johns Hopkins University School of 

Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA; 4Center for Nanomedicine, Department of Ophthalmology, Wilmer 

Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland USA ; 5Department of 

Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA ;

> 6

Department of Ophthalmology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, 

USA; 7Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Illinois, 

Chicago, Illinois, USA; 8University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa , Alabama; 9Department of Ophthalmology, 

Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA; 10 Department of Psychiatry, 

University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA; 11 De partment of Ophthalmology, Tufts 

University School of Medicine , Boston, MA, USA; 12Henderson Ocular Stem Cell Laboratory, Retina 

Foundation of the Southwest, Dallas, Texas, USA 

> #

The authors contributed equally 

*Corresponding Authors: 

Sayan Ghosh, SUNY, College of Optometry, 33 W 42 nd Street, Rm 1613A , New York, New York 

10036 ; sghosh@sunyopt.edu  +1 412 -583 -2767 

Debasish Sinha, 400 N Broadway, Smith Building, Rm 6039, Baltimore, Maryland 21231 

USA ; Debasish@jhmi.edu ; +1 410 -707 -8621 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

Conflict of interest statement: S.G., V .S.B., S .B., S .H. and D .S. declare a competing interest for U.S. 

patent application #63/902,825 which has been filed .

Abstract 

Aging is characterized by changes in gut microbiome, metabolic imbalance and chronic inflammation, 

yet how these processes integrate to drive tissue degeneration remains poorly defined. Using age -

related macular degeneration (AMD) as a model of tissue aging, we identify a diet -induced metabolic –

immune axis t hat promotes systemic and retinal degeneration. In mice, a high -fat, cholesterol -enriched 

(HFC) diet induced perturbations in the gut structural integrity and microbiome repertoire, as well as 

systemic metabolic aging signatures, prominently marked by reduced circulating histidine. Plasma 

histidine levels were similarly decreased in AMD patients and inversely correlated with body mass index 

(BMI ) in control donors. These diet -induced gut microbiome changes and subsequent metabolic 

alterations promoted peripheral innate immune reprogramming, with expansion of inflammatory 

neutrophils and monocytes that infiltrated the outer retina in a mouse model . Mechanistically, the g ut -

derived IGF1R/AKT2 signaling acts as a central regulator of global epigenetic remodeling and systemic 

immune aging under high -fat conditions in C. elegans . In a mouse model with an age -dependent dry 

AMD -like pathology, distinct retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) subpopulations exhibited downregulation 

of the histidine transporter SLC7A5, linking metabolic stress to activation of MIF/CD74 -dependent 

inflammatory signaling between RPE and infiltrating immune cells. Histidine supplementation or AKT2 

phospho -state modulation attenuated systemic im mune activation and rescued retinal degeneration. 

These findings identify histidine -axis dysregulation as a mechanistic bridge between diet -induced 

microbiome changes, metabolic stress, immune aging, and retinal degeneration. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

Introduction 

Aging involves the gradual accumulation of cellular and molecular damage that reduces tissue 

function and increases vulnerability to disease (1,2). Age -related macular degeneration (AMD), the 

leading cause of blindness among the elderly worldwide, exemplif ies this process and serves as a 

powerful model of accelerated aging in post -mitotic tissue. It is now recognized as a systemic disease 

driven by metabolic dysfunction and chronic inflammation rather than a purely local retinal disorder 

(3,4). Previous stu dies have shown that the gut microbiome, metabolic dysfunction, and chronic 

inflammation are key contributors to this decline (5 -7). The gut microbiome changes substantially with 

age (5), and these changes can influence peripheral metabolism such that alte rations affect distant 

organs beyond the intestine (8 -12), as evident in age -related diseases that show peripheral metabolic 

changes and chronic inflammation and immune dysregulation (1 3-27). However, the specific 

mechanisms whereby diet -induced gut microb ial remodeling generates defined metabolic signals 

capable of reprogramming peripheral immune cells and converging on vulnerable tissues to drive 

degeneration remain poorly understood. 

Nutrient sensing and amino acid metabolism are central to these aging processes ( 28,29 ). 

Several amino acids are known to decline with age in both humans and model organisms, and histidine 

is among the most consistently reduced (30 -34 ). Low histidine levels correlate with increased 

inflammation, metabolic disease, and oxidative damage across multiple studies ( 35 -39 ). Changes in 

amino acid availability can reprogram innate immune cells through a mechanism called trained 

immunity ( 40,41 ). These changes are of ten accompanied by epigenetic modifications that persist even 

after the initial trigger is removed ( 42 ). Trained immunity contributes to chronic inflammation during 

aging and contributes to several diseases ( 43 -45 ). The gut microbiome directly influences circulating 

amino acid levels since microbial enzymes degrade dietary protein and synthesize amino acids that 

enter host circulation. In contrast, an increase in amino acid metabolizing bacteria in the gut may 

decr ease the peripheral levels of those metabol ites ( 46). Germ -free animals which lack a microbiome 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

show altered amino acid profiles compared to conventionally raised animals ( 47,48 ). Antibiotic 

treatment that disrupts normal microbiome of the gut also changes plasma amino acid composition ( 49 -

51 ). Importantly, whether di et -driven alterations in gut microbiome and subsequent depletion of specific 

amino acids such as histidine activates defined molecular pathways to drive systemic innate immune 

reprogramming, and whether this process exacerbates degeneration in metabolically vulnerable tissues 

such as the retina, has not been eluded .

Across several model systems, metabolic and dietary interventions induce epigenetic changes 

that involve conserved longevity pathways including insulin and insulin -like growth factor 1 (IGF -1) 

signaling and AKT kinases , that are critically linked to maintenance of metabolic and inflammatory 

homeostasis (52 -56). Specifically, AKT2 which is the downstream effector of IGF -1 has been implicated 

in epigenetic remodeling and inflammatory processes relevant to AMD pathogenesis (57). Interestingly, 

in the intestine , modulation of IGF1R/DAF -2 signaling extends lifespan and reduces systemic 

inflammation in C. elegans (53 ). However, whether gut -driven histidine depletion activates IGF1R/AKT2 

signaling as a central node to drive systemic immune reprogramming through specific epigenetic 

mechanisms remains to be established. 

Activated peripheral immune cells are pre -disposed to infiltrate tissues already under stress 

where they trigger chronic inflammation (58 ,59 ). The diseased retina shows accumulation of lipid -rich 

deposits, lysosom e and mitochondria dysfunction, a nd display progressive cell loss along with many 

canonical hallmarks of chronic inflammation , such as immune cell infiltration and pro -inflammatory 

chemokines/cytokines activation (21 -23,5 7,60) . Substantial evidence in the literature links gut microbial 

composition to retinal aging and disease (13 -15 ,61) . Dietary interventions that reshape the microbiome 

can ameliorate or exacerbate retinal degeneration in animal models , and importantly, delay the 

progression of human diseases like age -related macular degeneration (AMD) (61 -63) , the most 

common cause of blindness among the elderly in the world (3 ). Despite these observations, the 

mechanisms by which gut alterations and amino acid perturbations affect retinal metaboli sm remain 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

unknow n. Additionally, whether systemic metabolic signals can reprogram the peripheral immune 

system and exacerbate retinal degenerative changes has not been verified. 

Here, we delineate a pathway through which diet -induced gut microbial remodeling drives 

systemic aging by disrupting amino acid metabolism and reprogramming innate immunity. Using AMD 

as a model of accelerated aging in post -mitotic tissue, and employing a high fat, cholesterol -enriched 

(HFC) diet in C57BL/6J mice and the RPE -specific Cryba1 conditional knockout (cKO) mouse model 

with age -dependent dry AMD -like pathology, alongside C. elegans as a genetically tractable system to 

interrogate conserved intestinal signaling, our data support a directional model in which HFC diet 

induced alt erations in gut microbiome acts upstream of systemic histidine depletion, and systemic 

immune deregulation . We identified that gut derived IGF1R -AKT2 signaling pathway drives global 

epigenetic reprogramming, leading to predisposition to inflammatory activation. In parallel, age -

dependent downregulation of SLC7A5 renders RPE cells metabolically vulnerable. The convergence 

of these systemic and tissue -intrinsic mechanisms culminates in MIF/CD74 -dependent chronic 

inflammation and degener ation. These findings highlight therapeutic opportunities for age -related 

diseases driven by metabolic and immune dysfunction. 

Results 

Diet -induced gut microbiome remodeling is associated with systemic metabolic aging 

signatures 

To investigate how dietary perturbations, affect the gut microbiome and systemic metabolism, 

we subjected 8-month -old WT C57bl6/j mice (male and female) to a high fat, cholesterol -enriched 

(HFC) diet regimen for 4 months (67 ). While high fat diet related gut microbiome changes are well 

documented, the impact of HFC, with distinct macro -nutrient composition and high cholesterol burden, 

remains unexplored. We employed a 16s rRNA sequencing -based assay on fecal samples from control 

and HFC fed mice. A total of 1,492,946 reads passed quality filters and chimera detection, leading to 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

identification of 2,588 operational taxonomic units (OTUs). Adequate OTU identification in each sample 

was confirmed by rarefaction analysis . Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on OTU 

abundances to observe global differences linked to diet treatment , which found distinct clustering of 

control and HFC microbiomes (Fig . 1a). Visual assessment suggested comparatively higher 

heterogeneity in the HFC gut microbiome profile when compared to the control. Firmicutes and 

Bacteroid ota were most common , based on relative abundance at the phyla level, which showed typical 

profiles (Fig . 1b). An overlap of 461 taxa were present in both groups, while 443 and 41 were exclusive 

to HFC and control animals , respectively (Fig . 1c). These comparisons suggested a n elevated 

taxonomic diversity in HFC animals that was confirmed through alpha diversity analysis (observed 

species) (Fig . 1d). Subsequently beta -diversity using weighted unifrac distance, which measures 

taxonomic diversity and abundance, revealed in -group clustering among control and HFC samples (Fig .

1e). To identify organisms significantly differentially represented in HFC gut microbiomes relative to 

control , linear discriminant analysis with LEfSe was performed and identified signature taxa at every 

taxonomic level (Fig . 1f). HFC microbiomes were enriched for Clostridia , Proteobacteria and 

Desulfobacterota among other taxa (Fig . 1g). At the same time , HFC samples had lower abundance of 

Bacilli and Lactobacil lales (Fig . 1h). Overall, HFC induced large scale shifts in gut microbial 

compositions. 

To determine whether gut microbiome alterations triggered systemic metabolic changes 

consistent with accelerated aging, we performed metabolomic profiling of peripheral blood. We found 

with p athway enrichment analysis by MetaboAnalyst 6.0 a significant enrichment in amino acid 

metabolism, particularly arginine biosynthesis, phenylalanine/tyrosine/tryptophan biosynthesis, 

alanine/aspartate/glutamate metabolism and histidine metabolism (arrow) pathways , known to decline 

with biological aging (Fig. 1 i). Notably, circulating histidine levels were significantly reduced in HFC -

exposed mice (Fig. 1 j and Supplementary Fig. 1a ). Histidine levels in the plasma/serum have been 

shown to decrease with age in multiple human cohorts independent of biological sex (28,29 ). To assess 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

human disease relevance, we measured plasma histidine levels in dry/early AMD patients and age -

matched healthy controls. AMD patients displayed lower histidine concentrations compared to controls 

with no AMD (Table -1 and Supplementary Fig. 1b ). This finding is consistent with prior human 

metabolomics studies demonstrating decreased systemic histidine in late AMD ( 68 ) and perturbations 

in histidine -related metabolites in AMD plasma ( 69,70 ). Additionally, h istidine levels inversely correlated 

with BMI in aged control donors (Fig.1 k), implicating altered histidine metabolism in individuals who are 

metabolically stressed and with higher body weight (Table -1). Together, these studies support 

dysregulation of histidine metabolism as a reproducible metabolic feature of metabolic stress and in 

human AMD. 

Metabolic dysfunction drives peripheral immune aging through trained immunity 

We next asked whether this metabolic shift associated with histidine depletion reprograms innate 

immunity. We hypothesized that amino acid depletion, particularly histidine deficiency , could influence 

peripheral innate immune reprogramming during AMD pathogenesis . Such reprogramming is typical of 

inflammaging, a chronic/sterile, low -grade inflammation that develops with advanced age and is 

independent of infections (71) . To evaluate whether this metabolic perturbation following HFC feeding 

induced immune aging phenotypes associated with AMD , we performed comprehensive immune 

profiling in a mouse model with age -dependent retinal chronic inflammation, immune cell infiltration and 

a dry AMD -like phenotype ( 57 ,65, 66) . HFC feeding was started in Cryba1 cKO mice at 8 months of age 

before onset of AMD -like phenotype, and continued for 4 months, well beyond onset of AMD -like 

changes (57 ,65, 66). Cryba1 fl/fl (Cryba1 -floxed ) mice were used as controls. Neutrophil numbers were 

increased in peripheral blood of HFC mice using flow cytometric analysis (Supplementary Fig. 2 and 

Fig. 2a) , a feature consistent with age -related chronic inflammation (72,73) . In HFC -fed Cryba1 fl/fl 

(Cryba1 -floxed controls ) animals, these neutrophils also had elevated levels of CXCR2 (Fig. 2b) , a 

resolution of inflammation marker (64) . However, HFC -fed Cryba1 cKO animals ha d lower CXCR2 

levels when compared to normal chow fed Cryba1 cKO or HFC -fed floxed controls, suggesti ve that 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

neutrophil function was reprogrammed by HFC -induced metabolic stress (Fig. 2 b), as has been 

reported previously in AMD patients (64 ). In addition, monocyte counts were also significantly elevated 

in HFC -exposed Cryba1 cKO animals , as compared to normal chow fed Cryba1 cKO or HFC -fed floxed 

(Cryba1 fl/fl ) controls (Fig. 2 c). Interestingly, Cryba1 cKO mice exhibited elevat ed basal expression of 

CCR2 in monocytes (Fig. 2d), indicative of systemic immune priming. CCR2 is a known pro -

inflammatory marker associated with increased monocyte retinal infiltratio n in AMD (74) . HFC 

independently increased the expression of CCR2 in floxed controls. However, no additive increase was 

observed in cKO mice under HFC conditions (Fig. 2d) , recapitulating the development of a pro -

inflammatory niche in the periphery and suggesting that age -driven inflammatory programming might 

predominate over dietary modulation . Furthermore, t o assess if peripheral metabolic insults trigger 

immune activation in AMD, we assessed the inflammatory status of both neutrophils and monocytes in 

vitro . We found marked elevation of pro -inflammatory mediators (65,66) , such as Lipocalin -2 (LCN -2), 

myeloperoxidase (MPO) and NET s (neutrophil extracellular trap) in cultured neutrophils from human 

donors (controls; with no eye disease) exposed to culture media supplemented with 10% human serum 

from AMD donors with the high risk CFH Y402H variant (H/H) , compared to cells that were exposed to 

serum from controls without AMD and CFH Y402 (Y/Y) (Fig. 2 e,f ). Interestingly, histidine (10 mM) 

supplementation could reverse this activation ( Fig. 2e,f) . Additionally, we found elevated infiltration of 

CCR2+ cells in the outer retina of HFC -exposed cKO mice as well as in retinas from 12 -mo nth -old 

(aged ) cKO mice , compared to floxed -controls fed with respective diets (Fig. 2g) . These mice have 

been previously shown to have prominent infiltration of neutrophils Iba1 -positive immune cells in to the 

outer retina and sub -retinal space with age (65,66) , suggesti ve of dysregulated immune homeostasis 

in the retina of this mouse model . Taken together, these findings suggest that gut alteration -driven 

histidine deficiency triggers systemic innate immune reprogramming and subsequent retinal infiltration ,

consistent with inflammaging, which could be associated with the exacerbation of several age -related 

retinal diseases like AMD .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

High fat diet -induced i ntestinal dysfunction reprograms the gut -systemic immune axis 

Given that histidine depletion likely originates from diet -induced microbiome alterations like 

increase in Proteobacteria and reduction in Lactobacillus (42) , we next asked whether structural 

disruption of the intestinal barrier mediates this systemic immune reprogramming . We therefore 

examined intestinal barrier integrity, a critical determinant of systemic inflammation in aging (75) . The 

distribution of E-cadherin, a key adheren s junction protein responsible for intestinal barrier 

maintenance/integrity (75) , was altered in the intestines of 12 -month -old Cryba1 -floxed mice under HFC 

conditions compared to normal chow as visualized with immunofluorescence confocal microscopy (Fig. 

3a). We also observed severe disruption of villus architecture and reduc ed intestinal villi length in HFC 

fed Cryba1 -floxed and cKO mice compared to mice fed normal chow, indicating compromised barrier 

integrity (Fig. 3b). To ascertain that gut structural alterations drives peripheral immune changes, we fed 

HFC to 5-month -old wild -type (WT) mice for 2 months with or without fecal microbiota transplantation 

(FMT) from normal chow fed littermates (Fig. 3c). Fecal transplantation rescued gut structural change s

after HFC exposure, as evident from maintenance of villi structure (arrow in Fig. 3d). Furthermore, flow 

cytometry analysis showed that FMT reduced the levels of CD45 high CD11b high Ly6C+Ly6G high 

neutrophils in peripheral blood when compared to sam ples from mice fed HFC alone ( Supplementary 

Fig. 3, Fig. 3e). Interestingly, FMT had no impact on the levels of inflammatory monocytes and 

monocytic myeloid -derived suppressor cells (M -MDSCs) (CD45 high CD11b high Ly6C +Ly6G low ) (Fig. 3f) .

This likely indicates an enhanced, yet potentially protective, immune response where the transplant 

actively modulat es inflammation induced by the HFC rather than simply suppressing it . Thus, it is 

possible that rescuing gut homeostasis under metabolic stress rescue s peripheral immune alterations 

(76) . These findings suggest that maintaining gut homeostasis is critical for systemic immune 

regulation .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

Gut -associated IGF1R signaling mediates epigenetic changes associated with accelerated 

immune aging 

The involvement of gut health has been critically associated with aging and age -related 

detrimental effects both in humans and other species that share numerous conserved genetic and 

molecular pathways (53,54) . To further validate the role of intestinal homeostasis in systemic 

inflammation, we focused on the evolutionarily conserved insulin/IGF -1 signaling (IIS) pathway using 

an established model to study gut function . In the intestine -specific inducible Daf2/IGF1R C. elegans 

line ( daf -2(hq363[daf -2::degron::mNeonGreen]) III ; Daf2 ins ), intestinal -specific knockout Daf2 increases 

longevity and confers healthy aging in distant tissues (53) . Synchronized Daf2 ins worms that w ere given 

high fat (HF) food for 72 h and treated with auxin (1 mM) to specifically knockout Daf2 in the intestine, 

which resulted in a noticeable decrease in gene expression of the critical pro -inflammatory mediator, 

Mek2 (mammalian MEK1/2) and Tir -1 (mammalian SARM1 ; Sterile Alpha and TIR Motif -containing 1) ,

compared to HF -fed Daf2 ins worms not treated with auxin (Fig. 4a,b ), suggesting gut -derived Daf2 

signaling triggers acute systemic inflammation during metabolic stress . Histidine supplementation (10 

mM ) rescue d the level s of these genes in HF -exposed Daf2 ins worms (Fig. 4a,b ). 

One downstream effector of IGF1R/ Daf2 is AKT 2, a key mediator of epigenetic and inflammatory 

processes (5 7,65,66,77) . We found that high fat exposure triggered akt -2 gene upregulation in Daf2 ins 

worms which was rescued by auxin treatment (Fig. 4 c). To further corroborate the influence of AKT2 

signaling on epigen etic changes, we performed global e pigenetic profiling in worms with an additional 

extrachromosomal copy of AKT2 (mgEx341 [akt -2::GFP::unc -54 3'UTR + rol -6(su1006)] ; transgenic 

Akt2 -GFP ). Our data showed global increase in DNA methylation (5 -methylcytosine, 5mC) in transgenic 

Akt2 -GFP worms exposed to HF (Fig. 4d), compared to WT worms exposed to HF . To establish 

causality of AKT2 signaling with histidine metabolism, we treated these worms with an AKT2 phospho -

state modulator (AKT2 -PSM ; AKT2i at 10 nM ) (78 ) or with histidine supplementation (10 mM) and 

observed that both treatments prevented HF -induced epigenetic remodeling, with DNA methylation 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

significantly downregulated (Fig. 4 d). Additionally, head bending angle was measured as a functional 

readout of physiological state, since changes in posture reflect underlying metabolic activity, fat 

accumulation, and neuromuscular health in worms. In Daf2 ins worms exposed to HF , the head bending 

angle increased at 24 hours, indicating a wider and more rigid posture consistent with elevated adiposity 

and metabolic impairment . This effect was significantly reduced by AKT2 -PSM (AKT2i) or histidine 

supplementation (Fig. 4e,f and Movie -1) . These findings suggest that HF stress induces a low -

metabolic, developmentally arrested state resembling dauer, while AKT2 inhibition or histidine helps 

restore a n active physiological condition . These findings suggest that gut derived IGF1R/AKT2 

signaling is a master regulator of global epigenetic changes and that if perturbed, can accelerate 

metabolic -immune aging .

Tissue -specific manifestation of metabolic changes and chronic inflammation in the retina 

We next asked whether systemic immune reprogramming converges with intrinsic metabolic 

retinal vulnerability. Th e retina , with its unusually high metabolic demand and limited regenerative 

capacity, serves as a sensitive readout of organism -wide aging (79) . Single -cell RNA sequencing 

(scRNAseq) of RPE /choroid tissue from aged (15 -month -old) WT and Cryba1 cKO mice (65), showed 

heterogenous transcriptomic RPE cell sub -populations characterized by differences in inflammatory 

and metabolic genes/pathway signatures between these populations (Fig. 5a,b). Our data also shows 

multiple infiltrating immune cells like neutrophils, monocyt es, and macrophages , which has been shown 

to be critical in AMD pathogenesis (21,65,66,74) , and each of which exhibited activation signatures 

characteristic of immune dysregulation, including noticeable enrichment of several metabolic and 

immune -modulatory/pro -inflammatory signaling pathways Fig. 5a and Supplementary Fig.4 a-f).

Additionally, Qiagen Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) comparative bioinformatic analysis between 

mouse RPE clusters and iPSC -RPE cells from CFH Y402H AMD donors were performed. Our analysis 

showed enrichment of similar inflammatory (green arrows) and metabolic (red arrows) genes/pathway s

(Fig. 5c), suggesti ve that transcriptional signatures accelerate cellular aging in the diseased state both 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

in the mouse model and humans . Interestingly, an altered Class 1 MHC -dependent antigen 

presentation gene cluster was enriched in both cKO and AMD RPE (Fig. 5b,c), as were pathways for 

eukaryotic protein synthesis pathways , oxidative phosphorylation and other metabolic pathways, 

consistent with elevated mTORC1 signaling that has been shown previously in both the mouse model 

and human AMD RPE ( 80,81 ). Furthermore, following comprehensive differential gene expression 

analysis across multiple cell types from RP E-choroid of 3- and 15 -months old WT and Cryba1 cKO ,

Slc7a5 expression was notably altered in specific RPE subpopulations (specifically cluster s 16 and 27) 

and in immune cells from Cryba1 cKO compared to controls at both 3 and 15 months (Fig. 5 d). We also 

found that in human datasets of scRNAseq of the retina that were analyzed by the spectacle database 

software , that Slc7a5 gene expression is noticeably downregulated in the RPE with increasing age and 

in both dry and neovascular AMD, compared to controls ( Supplementary Fig. 5a ,b ). Furthermore, 

SLC7A5 immunolabeling was decreased in the RPE of Cryba1 cKO and HFC treated cKO and floxed 

mice as well as human AMD retina (Supplementary Fi g. 6a ,b ). Mechanistically, ChIPseq analysis (82) 

further indicated the causal link between histidine deregulation and RPE alterations . H3K27ac ChIP -

seq profiles at the Slc7a5 locus , a gene responsible for histidine transport and mTORC1 regulation, 

was striking reduc ed in histone acetylation signal within an intronic region (chr8:121,895,526 –

121,895,926) in RPE cells from 4-month -old Cryba1 conditional knockout (cKO) mice , compared to 

floxed controls. This region shows clear H3K27ac enrichment in both FL replicates, indicating active 

enhancer or regulatory function under normal conditions. In contrast, this peak is notably diminished or 

absent in cKO RPE , as shown in both individual a nd combined (Cryba1 fl/fl and cKO) track views (Fig. 

5e), suggesting decrease d gene expression that mirror s predisposition to altered histidine metabolism 

in cKO RPE cells . These results s upport the model that aging triggers downregulation of Slc7a5 in the 

RPE with the result ant metabolic stress that trigger s detrimental signaling pathways and disease onset. 

Our single cell sequencing data implicated amino acid transport and metabolism in RPE 

dysfunction during AMD pathogenesis. To ascertain the effect of Cryba1 loss , which impairs lysosome 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

function, on RPE metabolic changes, we performed metabolomic profiling in the RPE . Our results 

revealed extensive enrichment in several amino acid metabolic pathways in Cryba1 cKO and floxed -

control RPE (Supplementary Fig. 7a). Lipid biosynthetic pathways are strongly activated by mTORC1 

signaling , which is regulated at the lysosome . We found major lipid metabolism genes in WT RPE 

overexpressing A3/A1 -crystallin or either of its two crystallin isoforms (A1 and A3), significantly 

downregulated compared to control WT RPE explants (Supplementary Fig. 7b). These data further 

support the importance of Cryba1 in RPE metabolic homeostasis during aging and AMD pathogenesis. 

Chronic retinal inflammation in AMD is governed by activation of proinflammatory mediators and 

subsequent infiltration of immune cells (21, 65,66,74) . We have previously shown significant sub -retinal 

infiltration of microglia and neutrophils in Cryba1 cKO mice with age (65,66) . We therefore investigate d

if RPE -specific molecular predispositions and simultaneous peripheral immune alterations triggered by 

HFC exposure, could drive chronic inflammation and exacerbate AMD -like pathology in the retina. Our 

scRNA -seq pathway analysis revealed noticeable enrichment of several inflammatory pathways in both 

cKO and human AMD RPE. Using comprehensive ligand -receptor (LR) interaction analysis using 

single -cell transcriptomic data of RPE/choroid tissue of WT and Cryba1 cKO mice (65) , we explored 

the cellular interactions driving chronic retinal inflammation at 3 - and 15 -months age (Supplementary 

Fig. 8a,b). Computational analysis revealed two different RPE sub -populations/ clusters ( RPE -16 and 

RPE -27) that had downregulated expression of Slc 7a5 and elevated express ion of inflammatory 

mediators including MIF (Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor), APP (Amyloid Precursor Protein), 

APOE (Apolipoprotein E), A2M (Alpha -2-Macroglobulin), and THBS1 (Thrombospondin -1) . Conversely, 

infiltrating immune cells like neutrophils, MDSCs and macrophages showed significant expression of 

their cognate receptors (Supplementary Fig. 8a,b ). Importantly, ligand -receptor pairing identified a 

MIF /CD74 and APOE /CD74 signaling axis as a potential bridge between RPE metabolic stress and 

immune act ivation. Aged (where AMD -like phenotype is evident), s tressed RPE cells , particularly RPE -

16 and 27 clusters with lower levels of Slc7a5 , expressed elevated levels of MIF and APOE while 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

resident immune cell, microglia and infiltrating immune cells like neutrophils, macrophages, and 

MDSC s expressed the CD74 receptor (Supplementary Fig. 8a,b). This temporal analysis identifi ed 

progressive expansion of this inflammatory network with age . Specifically, at 15 months, the cellular 

communication landscape intensified with recruitment of MDSC s expressing complement component 

C3, fibronectin (FN1), and immunosuppressive TGFB1 (Supplementary Fig. 8a,b). Notably, immune 

cells expressed matrix remodeling factors including MMP9 and SERPINE1, while widespread TGFB1 

signaling suggested attempted , but failed , inflammation resolution (Supplementary Fig. 8a,b). This 

predicted MIF/CD74 axis likely represents a critical signaling hub for chronic inflammatory transitions 

in AMD pathogenesis and a druggable therapeutic target for interrupting the RPE -immune inflammatory 

circuit. 

RPE cells are normally anti -inflammatory and effective at nullifying infiltrating immune cells in 

the sub -retinal space (SRS) , and its failure has been shown to be critical for eliciting chronic 

inflammation during AMD pathogenesis (2 1-25,65,66,74,83 ). Therefore, t o understand the role of the 

MIF /CD74 signaling axis in inflammation and exacerbation of RPE damage during nutrient stress and 

AMD, we exposed mouse peripheral immune cells with either : (i) MIF protein ; (ii) amino acid -free media 

(to mimic system ic depletion of amino acid s like histidine) ; (iii) MIF+amino acid free -media (to mimic 

both systemic and RPE -mediated activation cues) for 6 hours and then stained these cells with cell 

tracker dye, CMTPX followed by co -culture with 4-month -old mouse WT RPE explants for 24h. The 

percentage of immune cell clearance by the RPE was measured by counting CMTPX -positive cells on 

WT RPE explant cultures. We found that immune cells exposed to MIF , amino acid -free media or 

MIF+amino acid -free media were cleared less efficiently by RPE cells as compared to untreated 

immune cells (Fig. 5f) . Flow cytometry analysis of these cultured immune cells also revealed that MIF 

only treatment, amino acid free media , and MIF+amino acid free media treatment all lead to significant 

upregulation of CD74 expression in CD45 high CD11b high Ly6C +Ly6G high neutrophils (Fig. 5g and 

Supplementary Fig. 9 ), but not in CD45 high CD11b high Ly6C +Ly6G low inflammatory monocytes or M -

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

MDSCs (data not shown) , thereby suggesting that neutrophil but not monocytes or M -MDSCs might be 

responsible in immune dysregulation and inflammation during metabolic stress . This further 

corroborated the scRNAseq LR loop analysis that showed enrich ed MIF/CD74 signaling in neutrophils 

and macrophages , but not in monocytes from aged Cryba1 cKO RPE/choroid tissue (Supplementary 

Fig. 8).

Together, these findings suggest that SLC7A5 -mediated amino acid transport dysfunction 

triggers a biphasic cascade in which early RPE predisposition leads to age - or stress -induced metabolic 

crisis, failed compensation, and ultimately chronic MIF/CD74 -driven inflammation. These findings also 

suggest that systemic metabolic –immune aging processes converge in the retina, promoting sustained 

inflammation as a feature of accelerated tissue aging. 

Metabolic intervention rescues retinal degeneration in an acute model of dry AMD 

Having shown that gut microbiome changes was associated with histidine deficiency which in 

turn drives the metabolic -immune aging cascade, and that supplementation with histidine c an rescue 

peripheral immune changes, we wanted to ascertain if th e metabolic abnormalities and immune cell 

infiltration correlated with noticeable exacerbation of RPE damage. We showed an increase d number 

of dysmorphic RPE cells following HFC exposure in the 12 -months -old Cryba1 cKO mice that were fed 

with HFC for 4 months (Fig. 6a). We assessed the potential for metabolic intervention in an independent 

and non -genetic model of oxidative stress, a known contributor to AMD, caused by injection of sodium 

iodate (84) , which stresses the RPE and causes retinal degeneration (Supplementary Fig. 10) in mice 

fed a HFC diet (Fig. 6b). H istidine supplementation or AKT 2-PSM ( AKT2i ) treatment noticeably 

protected photoreceptor (rhodopsin loss; arrow) and RPE degenerative changes (asterisk), as evident 

from decline in the levels of Ezrin -Radixin -Moesin -binding phosphoprotein 50 ( EBP50 , marker of RPE 

polarity which is reduced during early/dry AMD pathogenesis) (57) in HFC +NaIO3 treated mice (Fig. 

6c). Interestingly, AKT2i treatment after HFC +NaIO 3 exposure effectively reduced HFC -induced 

elevation of peripheral immune cell populations , previously implicated in AMD ( 61, 65,66,74), including 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

levels of CD45 high CD11b high Ly6C +Ly6G high neutrophils and CX3CR1 + mononuclear phagocytes 

(CD45 high Ly6G -F4/80 +) (Fig. 6d ,e and Supplementary Fig. 3,1 1). Additionally , histidine supplementation 

similar ly rescue d CX3CR1 + mononuclear phagocyte numbers , but showed only modest d ecrease ,

rather than significant rescue in neutrophil levels (Fig. 6d ,e and Supplementary Fig. 3,1 1). NaIO 3 alone 

diminished the levels of these immune cells (Fig. 6d ,e and Supplementary Fig. 3,1 1) since elevated 

concentrations of sodium salts in the bloodstream can directly cause cytotoxicity to peripheral white 

blood cells (85) . Therefore, the significant ly increased levels of neutrophils and mononuclear 

phagocytes in the HFC +NaIO 3 group relative to WT and NaIO 3 only treatment, is likely solely due to 

the HFC treatment (Fig. 6d ,e and Supplementary Fig. 3,1 1). These results indicat e that targeting 

metabolic/inflammatory pathway s involving histidine and AKT2 might be crucial in reduc ing peripheral 

immune activation even under acute stress . Collectively, these findings indicate that histidine 

supplementation is a potent metabolic intervention that reverses systemic aging phenotypes and 

prevents immune alterations , thus validating histidine metabolism as a central, modifiable regulator of 

biological aging and age -related diseases like AMD (Fig. 6 f).

Discussion 

AMD is increasingly recognized as a systemic disease influenced by metabolic dysfunction and 

chronic inflammation rather than a purely local retinal disorder ( 13 -15,2 1-23). Aging is characterized by 

gut microbiome alterations , inflammaging, and metabolic decline ( 1,2,5 ), yet direct mechanistic links 

between diet -induced metabolic stress and retinal degeneration have remained unclear. Our study 

identifies dysregulation of histidine metabolism as a central metabolic mediator that connect s HFC -

induced gut dysfunction to systemic immune reprogramming and retinal pathology. By integrating 

microbiome, metabolomic, immunologic, and single -cell transcriptomic analyses across mouse models 

and human samples, we desc ribe a gut -metabolic -immune axis that converges on the retina and 

exacerbates AMD -like degeneration. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

Consistent with prior reports that high fat diet alters microbial diversity and promotes expansion 

of inflammatory taxa ( 13-15 ), herein, we provide novel evidence for the impact of a specific diet , with 

elevated cholesterol burden on gut health. We observed large -scale microbial restructuring 

accompanied by systemic metabolic signatures of accelerated aging. Amino acid metabolism, 

particularly histidine pathways, emerged as prominently disrupted. Increase in Proteobacteria in the gut 

has been previously shown to be a key factor for peripheral histidine depletion (42). Also, c irculating 

histidine declines with biological aging in humans ( 28,29 ), and multiple metabolomic studies have 

independently reported reduced histidine and histidine -related metab olites in AMD plasma ( 68 -70 ). Our 

findings extend these observations by demonstrating that diet -induced gut microbiome remodeling 

recapitulates this aging -associated histidine deficiency and links it mechanistically to immune 

activation. These data support the concept that metabolic insufficiency is not merely correlative but 

functionally connected to disease progression. 

Metabolic stress has been shown to induce trained innate immunity and inflammaging ( 7,71 ). In 

agreement with this framework, histidine depletion in our models was associated with increased levels 

of inflammatory neutrophils and monocytes, cell populations implicated in AMD pathogenesis 

(21,65,66,74 ). Intestinal barrier disruption and activation of IGF1R/AKT 2 signaling further align with 

prior evidence that insulin/IGF -1 pathway regulate longevity, immune tone, and epigenetic remodeling 

across species ( 52 -54 ). Our C. elegans data demonstrating gut -dependent inflammatory and epigenetic 

alterations, consistent with reports linking metabolic stress to durable chromatin changes and immune 

memory in multiple organisms (49 -51,53 -56 ). Together, these findings position gut -derived metabolic 

stress as an upstream driver of systemic immune aging. 

In the retina, we demonstrate that systemic histidine deficiency converges with intrinsic RPE 

vulnerability. SLC7A5 (LAT1), a key transporter of amino acids including histidine, has been implicated 

in metabolic regulation and mTOR signaling ( 86 ). Our observation of reduced SLC7A5 expression in 

aging and AMD RPE aligns with transcriptomic datasets showing metabolic and inflammatory 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

reprogramming in diseased RPE ( 87 ). Our bioinformatic l igand –receptor loop analysis (65) identified 

MIF /CD74 as a central signaling axis linking metabolically stressed RPE to infiltrating immune cells. 

MIF is a pleiotropic cytokine elevated in inflammatory and degenerative conditions, and CD74 -mediated 

signaling promotes leukocyte activation and survival ( 88,89 ). Prior studies have implicated MIF and 

CD74 in retinal inflammation ( 90,91 ); our data mechanistically connect this pathway to amino acid 

stress and impaired immune cell clearance by RPE, suggesting a feed -forward inflammatory loop. 

Importantly, metabolic stress and immune dys regulation modified disease trajectory and 

exacerba ted RPE damage in a mouse model with an age -dependent chronic dry AMD -like phenotype 

(65, 66,80) . Additionally, histidine supplementation, AKT2 -PSM therapy , and microbiota restoration 

attenuated immune activation upon HFC exposure . Further, h istidine supplementation and AKT2 -PSM 

therapy rescued retinal degeneration in an acute mouse model of oxidative stress, a known factor in 

AMD pathobiology (84) . Recently, nutrient sensing and amino acid availability are increasingly 

recognized as modulators of immune and tissue homeostasis ( 27 -30,35 -37 ), and dietary modulation 

has been proposed as a strategy in AMD prevention ( 15 ). 

Collectively, our data support a directional model in which diet -induced alterations 

in gut micr obiome functions as the upstream trigger of systemic metabolic deregulation and immune 

aging. This microbial remodeling reduces circulating histidine, suggesting this as the initiating metabolic 

event. We identify gut -derived IGF1R /AKT2 signaling as the central regulatory node , integrating 

metabolic stress with global epigenetic remodeling and innate immune reprogramming. Depletion in 

peripheral histidine levels leads to expansion and inflammatory priming of peripheral neutrophils and 

monocytes, generating a state of systemic immune aging. Our study shows that histidine mediated 

immune regulation converges in the retina, where age -associated downregulation of the major histidine 

transporter SLC7A5 renders RPE cells metabolically vulnerable. The intersection of systemic immune 

activation with RPE -intrinsic amino acid transport deficiency indicates a feed -forward inflammatory 

circuit mediated in part through MIF/CD74 signaling, culminating in chronic inflammation and 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

degeneration. Thus, histidine -axis dysregulation links environmental dietary stress to systemic immune 

remodeling and tissue -specific pathology through a unified metabolic –immune mechanism. 

Notably, while our data identify neutrophils and monocytes and mononuclear phagocytes as the 

predominant infiltrating populations, we do not determine the retinal involvement of other peripheral 

immune cells like MSDC, NK or T cell subsets and whether they are also being modulated by the 

histidine axis . Additionally , to ascertain the histidine metabolic fate in RPE or immune cells, future in -

depth studies employing isotope -labeled metabolic flux analysis will need to be performed . Importantly, 

this study does not exclude the possibility that the HFC diet exerts direct effects on retinal -resident 

immune cells, such as microglia, or tissue resident macrophages (TRM) independent of gut 

microbiome, systemic histidine depletion and peripheral immu ne reprogramming leading to the retinal 

degenerative changes . Though our results support that gut -mediated alterations in histidine metabolism 

triggers peripheral immune deregulation and exacerbates retinal inflammation/degeneration, an 

alternative pathway could be the direct involvement of dietary/metabolic components in regulating 

retinal im mune cells (microglia, TRM). Future experiments and in -depth studies are needed to ascertain 

the direct impact of diet on retinal immune cells. 

Methods 

Antibodies 

The flow cytometry antibodies are CD45 -PECy7 (103113 , BioLegend ), CD11b -Alexa fluor 700 (557960, 

BD Pharmigen), Ly6C -BV421 (128031, Biolegend), Ly6G -APC (560599, BD Pharmigen), CCR2 -FITC 

(150607, Biolegend), CXCR2 -APC/Cy7 (149313, Biolegend) , CX3CR1 -PerCp -Cy5.5 (149009, 

Biolegend), F4/80 ( 12 -4801 -82 , Invitrogen) and CD74 ( 151002 , Biolegend). The secondary antibody 

used to tag CD74 antibody is Goat anti -rat -Alexa fluor 488 ( A-11006 , Invitrogen). The antibodies used 

in immunohistochemistry studies are CCR2 (a b254375, Abcam), E -cadherin (3195S, Cell Signaling), 

ZO -1 ( 13663S , Cell Signaling), Rhodopsin ( NBP2 -25160SS , Novus Biologicals), and EBP50 ( PA1 -090 ,

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

Invitrogen). The secondary antibody and cytosolic/nuclear counterstains used for the respective 

immunohistochemistry studies are Donkey anti -rabbit -Alexa fluor 555 (A31572, Invitrogen), Donkey 

anti -mouse -Alexa fluor 488 (A21202, Invitrogen), Phalloidin -Ale xa fluor 488 (A12379, Invitrogen), 

Hoechst ( 62249 , Invitrogen) and DAPI ( 62248 , Thermo Fisher). 

Animals 

All animal studies were conducted in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Animals 

(National Academy Press) and were approved by the Johns Hopkins University Animal Care and Use 

Committee. The authors have complied with all relevant ethical regulations for animal maintenance and 

euthanasia during this study. RPE -specific A3/A1 -crystallin conditional knockout mice (Cryba1 cKO) 

were generated as described previously by our laboratory (80). WT and Cryba1 -floxed mice were used 

as controls. All mice that were used in this study were negative for RD8 mutation (80) 

Sex as a biological variable 

AMD is affected in both males and females (24), so animals of both sexes were used in our study in 

equal proportions to ascertain any sex -based bias in experimental results. 

HFC diet 

5-month -old C57Bl6/j (WT ) mice were fed with either normal chow or HFC diet ( TD.88051 ,

Envigo ) (67) for 8 weeks; 8-month -old Cryba1 -floxed and cKO mice were fed with these same diets for 

16 weeks and then experiments were performed. 

Human blood isolation 

Human venous blood was isolated from donors with or without AMD (Table -1) at the Henderson 

Ocular Stem Cell Laboratory, Retina Foundation of the Southwest , following their approved institutional 

protocol (ARMD -SS -2019 ). Serum isolation and genotyping of each donors for the CFH Y402H risk 

allele was performed using Taqman probe kit (C_8355565_10, Thermo Fisher) (66,78). 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

Fecal matter transplantation 

WT mice fed with HFC for 4 weeks were subjected to microbiota depletion via oral gavage (200 

L) of equal ratio of 1 g/m L each of an antibiotic cocktail containing neomycin (N5285 -25G , Sigma 

Aldrich) , metronidazole (M3761 -5G , Sigma Aldrich) , ampicillin (A9393 -5G , Sigma Aldrich) and 

gentamycin (G3632 -5G , Sigma Aldrich) along with 0.5 g/m L of vancomycin (94747 -1G , Sigma Aldrich), 

administrated daily for 3 consecutive days ( 92 ). Immediately after microbiota depletion, fecal sample 

from normal chow fed WT mice was weighed and suspended in sterile PBS (Thermo Fisher, Cat# 

10010 -023) and administered to microbi ota depleted HFC fed WT mice by oral gavage ( 300 L) at a

dose of 20 mg/day for 3 consecutive days (93) . Animals were euthanized 8 weeks after the initiation of 

HFC treatment. 

C. elegans generation , maintenance and treatments 

Caenorhabditis elegans strains WT , Daf2 ins (daf -2(hq363[daf -2::degron::mNeonGreen]) III ;

MQD2428 ), and mgEx341 [akt -2::GFP::unc -54 3'UTR + rol -6(su1006)] , a trans genic reporter lines were 

obtained from the CAENORHABDITIS GENETICS CENTER (CGC) , University of Minnesota which is 

funded by NIH Office of Research Infrastructure Programs (P40 OD010440). The worms were 

maintained on nematode growth medium (NGM) agar plates seeded with E. coli OP50 at 25 °C using 

standard conditions. All experiments were performed on synchronized L4 young -adult worm s. To study 

the effect of high fat (HF) on these worms, OP50 cultures were incubated with 15.8% of lipid mixture 

(L0288 -100ML , Sigma Aldrich) and then spread on NGM plates and incubated for 6 hours at 25°C u sing 

standard conditions . Next, to ascertain the involvement of Daf2 signaling in the gut after HF exposure, 

1 mM Auxin was used to specifically degrade Daf2 in the intestinal cells of Daf2 ins worms. Additionally, 

AKT2 -PSM ( AKT2i; 10 nM) and histidine (10 mM; H8000 -25G , Sigma Aldrich) were also added to 

selected HF+OP50 cultures and then added to NGM plates before plating the worms. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

Single cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) analysis and bioinformatics 

RPE -choroid cell suspension s from 3- and 15 -month -old WT and Cryba1 cKO mice w ere 

subjected to scRNAseq as described previously (65) . Seurat objects for each sample were created 

using the function “CreateSeuratObject” in Seurat v5.2.1 (94) . Cells with nFeature_RNA > 8000, 

nFeature_RNA < 250, nUMI > 40000, nUMI < 500 , log10(GenesPerUMI) < 0.8, or with a mitochondrial 

rate > 20% were filtered out. Predicted doublets were identified and removed using Scrublet v0.2.1 (95) 

with the default parameter settings. Then genes detected in less than 5 cells we re also removed. As a 

result, the expression of 17626 genes in 10134 cells were used for downstream analysis. After 

integration and clustering using Seurat, cell type identities were assigned based on the top marker 

genes of each cluster as well as visua lizing the expression of canonical marker genes of candidate cell 

types. Average gene expression values in each cell type/cluster and each sample were then calculated 

by the function “AverageExpression” in Seurat package. Differential expression analysis w as performed 

on each cell type/cluster of interest between cKO and WT samples by the function FindMarkers with 

test.use = “wilcox” in Seurat package. Gene set enrichment analysis for the KEGG pathways of interest 

was performed using the function “gseKEGG” of the R package clusterProfiler v4.10.0 (96) .

For the analysis of ligand -receptor interactions between cell types/clusters, we used the default 

built -in ligand -receptor interaction database, intracellular signaling database and gene regulatory 

networks in the R package LRLoop (65) , removed ligand -receptor pairs and intracellular signaling 

interactions with detection rate less than 2.5% in the corresponding cell types/clusters. The remaining 

candidate ligand -receptor pairs between each pair of cell types/clusters of interest in eac h sample were 

scored by the package LRLoop with its standard pipeline and default parameters. Then for each ligand -

receptor pair between each cell type/cluster, the maximum score across WT and cKO samples at each 

time point was taken as its interaction score for that time poin t. For the clarity of visualization, the top 

sixty ligand -receptor pairs of the highest interaction scores among each group of interactions of interest 

were identified and included in the corresponding Circos plots. For comparative analysis of scRNAseq 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

(mouse) and RNAseq (human iPSC -RPE) differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from mouse and 

human datasets were identified based on the criteria of the genes having an expression count greater 

than or equal to the 1.5 -fold change (FC) between two experimental conditions and a false discovery 

rate (FDR) less than 0.05. After respective cutoffs of FC > 1.5, P < 0.05, and FDR < 0 .05, the DEGs 

were identified for each experimental comparison, each list of genes along with their differential 

expression values was u ploaded to Qiagen Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Pathway enrichment 

matrix was represented from z -scores and displayed via heatmap (97). Gene expression analysis was 

performed from human scRNAseq datasets (87) using the SPECTACLE tool, which is a Single -Cell 

Atlas of Gene Expression in the Eye , developed by the University of Iowa Institute for Vision Research .

RNAseq analysis 

WT RPE explants (n=3) infected with Ad -RFP, Ad -A3 -RFP, Ad -A1 -RFP and Ad -A3/A1 -RFP 

constructs (customized from Vector Biolabs) and human iPSC -RPE cells (n=3) from AMD ( CFH Y402H) 

and control siblings ( CFH Y402) donors (78), respectively were subjected to total RNA isolation using 

a commercially available kit (BIO -52072 , Bioline ). The isolated RNA was subjected to cDNA library 

preparation followed by RNAseq and bioinformatic analysis, which was performed as a paid service by 

Novogene, USA, using their standardized protocols (5 7).

16S rRNAseq and analysis 

Fecal matter from Cryba1 -floxed and cKO mice fed with either normal chow or HFC were 

harvested from small intestine. Gut bacterial communities of control and HFC diet fed animals were 

profiled using 16S rRNA sequencing (V4 region) . Sample preparation, sequencing and analyses was 

performed by Novogene following standard protocols. Briefly, paired -end Illumina reads were 

processed using the QIIME pipelines for quality control of raw data, OTU identification and microbial 

community an alysis. Base R packages, tidyverse and edgeR were used for data visualization. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

Sodium Iodate model and in vivo treatment of AKT2 -PSM and histidine 

The sodium iodate model for dry AMD was generated using previously a published method (84) .

Briefly, WT mice (5 -month -old) were injected intraperitoneally with 20 mg/kg body weight of sodium 

iodate after 7 weeks of HFC or NC exposure and animals were euthanized after one week (84) .

Pretreatment of once weekly administration of AKT2 -PSM (AKT2i; 0.1 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) or 

histidine (1.875 g/kg, oral gavage) (98) was given to mice starting from 5th week after HFC exposure 

and the treatment continued throughout the experimental duration. 

Neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation 

Human neutrophils (IQB -Hu1 -Nu10 , IQ Biosciences) were cultured on fibrinogen coated glass 

bottom plates ( 66 ) in presence or absence of 10% human AMD (from CFH Y402H donors , Table -1)

serum or serum from sibling controls (from CFH Y402 donors , Table -1) for 6 hours. To assess the effect 

of histidine on neutrophil activation, 10 mM of histidine was added to selected AMD serum containing 

cultures. The neutrophils were fixed and then stained with DAPI (1 g/ml), the plates were washed with 

1× PBS, 5 times, for 15 min each and then mounted with a coverslip using DAKO mounting medium 

until imaged with Zeiss LSM 880 microscope to assess the formation of NETs in different conditions 

(66 ). 

Enzyme -Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA )

ELISA was performed to assess the levels of LCN -2 (ELH -Lipocalin2 -1, Ray Biotech) and MPO 

(ELH -MPO -1, Ray Biotech) in neutrophil lysates from cultures containing 10% human AMD (from CFH 

Y402H donors) serum or serum from sibling controls (from CFH Y402 donors) for 6 hours with or without 

10 mM histidine. The ELISA was done following the manufacturer’s protocol. 

Flow cytometry 

Mouse blood immune cells were analyzed by flow cytometry using previously published method s

(61, 66) . Briefly, blood was collected in heparinized vials and RBCs were lysed using lysis buffer (00 -

4333 -57 , Thermo Fisher); whole blood immune cells were harvested as pellet after centrifugation at 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

1000g for 10 min. Cell pellets were used to assess the changes in immune cell populations by flow 

cytometry (SONY FACS) , after staining with anti -Ly6G, anti -Ly6C, anti -CD11b, anti -CXCR2, anti -CCR2 

and anti -CD45 antibodies at a concentration of 1 g/mL for 90 min at room temperature .

Metabolomics and histidine quantification 

The serum and RPE from different mouse groups ( Cryba1 -floxed and cKO mice fed with either 

normal chow or HFC ) were used for metabolomics analysis (GC -TOF MS) as a paid service from West 

Coast Metabolomics Center , UC Davis, CA. The metabolomics results were bioinformatically analyzed 

using Metaboanalyst 6.0. Quantitative assessment of different metabolites was performed at alpha = 

0.05 level. For metabolites with significant ANOVA results (p < 0.05), post -hoc pairwise comparisons 

were conducted using the Bonferroni correction to control the family -wise error rate. The adjusted 

significance level for pairwise comparisons w as $ \alpha' = \alpha/m$, where $m = \binom{4}{2} = 6$ is 

the number of pairwise comparisons. All analyses were performed using SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute 

Inc., Cary, NC). Multiple testing across metabolites was addressed by reporting false discovery ra tes 

for significant findings. 

Quantitative estimation of histidine levels from human (control and AMD) serum was performed 

by HPLC as a paid service from the Clinical Pharmacology Analytical Core (CPAC) , Indiana University, 

Indianapolis, I N.

The estimation of histidine from mouse serum was performed quantitatively using sample 

preparation and analysis methods published previously (99 -101 ) with modifications as described below. 

Briefly, serum samples were deproteinized using perchloric acid precipitation followed by sequential 

dilution. Analyte -containing serum was mixed with an equal volume of perchloric acid (1:1, v/v) and 

vortexed thoroughly to precipitate proteins. The mixture was centrifuged at 14,000 –16,000 × g for 5 –

10 min at 4 °C, and th e clear supernatant was carefully transferred to a fresh microcentrifuge tube. The 

recovered supernatant was subsequently diluted 10 -fold with 0.01 M hydrochloric acid to reduce matrix 

effects and improve chromatographic performance, followed by a second c entrifugation under identical 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

conditions to remove any residual particulates. The resulting clarified supernatant was again diluted 

with 0.01 M hydrochloric acid to achieve a final 10 -fold dilution relative to the second -spin supernatant. 

Before the derivatization and injection, sample s were passed through a 0.22 m syringe or spin filter to 

protect the chromatographic column. The processed extracts were either analyzed immediately or 

stored briefly on ice until derivatization. 

The pre -column derivatization reagent was prepared fresh daily in sodium borate buffer (pH 9.9). 

O-phthalaldehyde (OPA, 13.4 mg) was first dissolved completely in 1.0 mL of methanol and then 

combined with 9.0 mL of sodium borate buffer to obtain a final re agent volume of 10 mL containing 10 

mM OPA. Subsequently, 3 -mercaptopropionic acid (MPA, 10 L) was added as the thiol component 

required for isoindole formation. The solution was mixed gently, filtered through a 0.22 m membrane, 

protected from light, and stored at 4 °C. The reagent was used within 24 hours of preparation. 

Chromatographic analyses were performed using a Shimadzu Corporation HPLC system 

equipped with LC -40 series quaternary pumps, a SIL -40C XR autosampler, a CL SIL -40C X3 

autosampler module, and both UV –Vis and fluorescence detectors. Instrument control, data acquisition, 

and peak integration were carried out using Shimadzu LabSolutions software. Separation was achieved 

on a reversed -phase C18 analytical column using a binary mobile phase consisting of water containing 

0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (mobile p hase A) and acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid 

(mobile phase B). 

Gradient elution was performed according to the Agilent amino acid analysis program, starting 

at 2% B (0 –0.35 min), increasing linearly to 57% B at 13.4 min, stepped to 100% B at 13.5 min, held 

until 15.7 min, and returned to 2% B at 15.8 min with re -equil ibration until 18.0 min. The flow rate was 

maintained at 1.5 mL/min, and the injection volume was 25 L. 

OPA -derivatized histidine was detected using fluorescence detection with an excitation 

wavelength of 347 nm and an emission wavelength of 454 nm. Under these conditions, derivatized 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

histidine eluted at approximately 3.5 min and was quantified based on peak area relative to calibration 

standards. 

Cryo -sectioning 

Mouse retina and gut sections were performed as explained previously (57). The retinal and gut 

sections slides were incubated with respective primary antibod ies prepared in primary antibody buffer 

(1:100) containing 1% Tween 20 + 0.5% BSA in PBS and incubated in a humidified chamber overnight 

at 4°C. The slides were washed with PBS + 1% Tween 20 three times. The slides were then incubated 

at room temperature in the dark for 2 hours with appropriate secondary antibody buffer containing 0. 1% 

Tween 20 + 0.5% BSA in PBS and DAPI/Hoechst or Phalloidin as per the experiments. T he slides were 

washed with 1× PBS, 5 times, for 15 min each and then mounted with a coverslip using DAKO mounting 

medium until imaged with Zeiss LSM 8 80 microscope (5 7). 

RPE flat mount staining 

Mouse RPE flat mount s were prepared as explained previously (57 ). The flat mounts were 

blocked with appropriate serum ( 57 ). Then the flat mounts were stained with Iba1 or ZO -1 ( 13663S ,

Cell Signaling Technology) in primary antibody buffer ( 1% Tween 20 + 0.5% BSA in PBS ) and incubated 

in a humidified chamber overnight at 4°C , after quenching autofluorescence using sodium borohydride 

(57 ). After three washes with 1% Tween 20 in PBS, the flat mounts were stained with Anti -rabbit Alexa 

fluor 555 (1:200 ; A31572 , Invitrogen ) and DAPI (1:2000; 62248 , Thermo Fisher) in 0. 1% Tween 20 + 

0.5% BSA in PBS for 2 hours in dark/room temperature ( 57 ). The RPE flat mounts were washed 5 times 

with 1× PBS, 15 min each and then mounted with a coverslip using DAKO mounting medium until 

imaged with Zeiss LSM 880 microscope and quantification of dysmorphic RPE was performed as 

explained previously ( 57 ). 

RPE mediated immune cell clearance assay 

Peripheral immune cells were harvested as explained previously (66). The cells were cultured 

in presence of MIF (1ng) or amino acid free media (R90100110L, USBiological) with 10% dialyzed fetal 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

bovine serum (A3382001, Thermo Fisher) or both for 6h and then stained with CMTPX red (C34552, 

Invitrogen) as explained previously (66) and co -cultured with 4-month -old WT RPE explants. The whole 

RPE explant was stained with Phalloidin -488 and DAPI after three PBS washes the next day and then 

mounted on a cover slip and visualized under LSM 880 (Zeiss, Switzerland). The number of CMTPX 

positive cells were counted on RPE surfaces as explained previously (74). 

Quantitative RT -PCR 

RNA isolation and cDNA preparation was performed in C. elegans using previously published 

method s (57 ). Taqman probe (Thermo Fisher) based qPCR was performed using Mek -2

(Ce02415226_m1 ) and Tir -1 (Ce02444988_g1 ), and Act3 (Ce02784145_s1 ) as we have described 

previously (57).

DNA methylation 

C. elegans epigenetic changes were estimated using DNA methylation kit and using the manufacturer’s 

protocol ( P-1030 -48 , Epigentek) .

Health span estimation in C. elegans 

Health span assays in nematodes were conducted as illustrated in Figure 4. Animals were 

placed in a six -well plate illuminated from below by an infrared (IR) LED array (Univivi, USA). The 

emitted light was diffused through a silicone pad and subsequently through agarose to generate a 

homogeneous background for bright -field imag ing. A varifocal lens (Computar, USA) and a long -pass 

filter (LPF; Schott, Germany) were mounted on a camera (Teledyne, USA) positioned above the 

plate. The camera was controlled using custom Python scripts to record 60 -second video bursts at 10 

Hz every 30 minutes. Each experimental session lasted 24 hours. 

Video bursts were processed with a custom Python pipeline implemented in OpenCV (version 

4.8.1). A circular region of interest (ROI) was manually defined, and frames were cropped to its 

bounding box to reduce computational load. Two user -defined lines subd ivided the ROI into four 

quadrants ( each treatment group ) for regional behavioral analysis. Worm detection was performed 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

independently on each frame. To estimate background intensity, a maximum time -projection was 

computed across every 100 -frame s. Each grayscale frame was subtracted from the corresponding 

background image to generate an absolute -difference image, which was Gaussian -blurred and band -

pass thresholded within a user -defined intensity range. Morphological opening with an elliptical 

str ucturing element was applied to remove small artifacts, and the resulting binary mask was restricted 

to the ROI. External contours were extracted and filtered by area to exclude objects outside the 

expected size range of a worm. For each retained contour, the enclosed binary mask was skeletonized 

using Zhang –Suen thinning to obtain the medial axis. The longest geodesic path within the skeleton 

was identified, and seven equally spaced points were interpolated along this path to gen erate an 

ordered spine representation. 

Detections were linked across consecutive frames to maintain persistent animal identities. 

Centroid coordinates were used to compute a pairwise Euclidean distance matrix between frames, and 

optimal assignments were determined using the Hungarian algorithm with a maximum allowable 

displacement of 50 pixels. Detections exceeding this threshold were not matched. Unmatched contours 

were assigned new identities, and tracks were terminated if no match was found in subsequent frames. 

Head -tail orientation was inferred from whole -contour motion. For each tracked animal, filled 

contour masks from consecutive frames were compared to identify advance regions (pixels newly 

occupied) and retreat regions (pixels vacated). The vector from the centroid of the retreat region to that 

of the advance region represented net translational motion of the body. This vector was projected onto 

the spine axis to determine directional consistency with the current head assignment. Evidence for or 

against the assigned orientation accumulated across frames. The spine orientation was reversed only 

after three consecutive frames of contrary evidence, after which the evidence score was reset with a 

positive bias to introduce hysteresis and prevent rapid oscillation during pauses or low -displacement 

periods. The head -bending angle was computed on the oriented spine as the angle between the first 

two segments at the head end (10 2).

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

Two animal -level exclusion criteria were applied prior to statistical summarization. First, animal 

identities persisting for fewer than five frames were discarded as transient segmentation noise. Second, 

identities with zero cumulative centroid displacemen t were excluded as stationary debris. For each 

remaining animal, mean head -bending angle across valid frames . Per -animal metrics were aggregated 

by region and burst (time point). For each region at each time point, the arithmetic means and standard 

error across all included animals were calculated for head -bending angle .

Statistics 

Analyses were performed using the GraphPad 8.0 software and Microsoft Excel. Differences 

between m ultiple groups were analyzed using one -way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post -hoc test and 

differences between only two groups were estimated by Student’s t -test ( 57,65,66 ). Differences were 

considered significant when p -value<0.05. The analyses were performed on at least three biological 

replicates (n). All the values are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM ) (57,65,66 ).

Study approval 

The mouse stud ies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee 

(IACUC) of The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine (protocol #MO24M177) , while the 

human studies were conducted at the R etina Foundation of the Southwest u nder their approved 

protoc ol #ARMD -SS -2019. 

Data availabili ty 

All sequencing data will be uploaded to the GEO NCBI database upon acceptance. 

Author Contributions: S.G. and D .S. conceived, designed and supervised the study and secured 

funding. S .G., V .K., S .B., V .S.B., J.N., and P .D. performed experimental studies. Y .X., A .K.M, and J .Q.

provided bioinformatics expertise. S.G., D.M., H .W., J .Y. performed C. elegans health span study 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

microscopy and analysis. A.S., A .I.A., and P .P. performed histidine quantification from human plasma. 

J.D. and D .B. performed statistical analysis on the metabolomics dataset. D.C. S.A.M. and R.M.K .

performed and analyzed mouse serum estimation of histidine. S.R.S. generated and characterized 

iPSC -RPE lines and provided human plasma samples for the study. S .G. and D .S. interpreted the 

results . S.G. and D .S. co -wrote the manuscript. S.H., S.R., S.G., J.T.H. and D .S. reviewed and edited 

the manuscript. All authors have approved the final version. 

Acknowledgement s: This study was supported by NIH K99EY033421 (S .G.), Foundation Fighting 

Blindness - Free Family AMD Research Award BR -CMM -0424 -0882 -TUF (D .S. & S.R. ), The Johns 

Hopkins University School of Medicine start -up funds (DS), funds from the Frieda Derdeyn Bambas 

Professorship in Ophthalmology (D .S.), P30EY001765 core award from the National Eye Institute, NIH 

to the Wilmer Eye Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, and unrestricted funds 

from Research to Prevent Blindness Inc., NY to the Wilmer Eye Institute, The Johns Hopkins U niversity 

School of Medicine. The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. J. Samuel Zigler., Jr. for reading and 

providing necessary edits to the manuscript .

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

References 

1.  Tenchov R, Sasso JM, Wang X, Zhou QA. Aging Hallmarks and Progression and Age -Related 

Diseases: A Landscape View of Research Advancement. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2024;15(1):1 -

30. 

2.  Guo J, Huang X, Dou L, Yan M, Shen T, Tang W, Li J. Aging and aging -related diseases: from 

molecular mechanisms to interventions and treatments. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 

2022;7(1):391. 

3.  Handa JT, Bowes Rickman C, Dick AD, Gorin MB, Miller JW, Toth CA, Ueffing M, Zarbin M, 

Farrer LA. A systems biology approach towards understanding and treating non -neovascular 

age -related macular degeneration. Nat Commun. 2019;10(1):3347. 

4.  Castro -Fernández DC, Cañizo -Outeriño A, Cuartero -Martínez A, Gil -Martinez M, Mondelo -

Garcia C, González -Barcia M, Álvarez -Barrios A, Fernández -Ferreiro A. A systematic review on 

age -related macular degeneration: New insights from multi -omics studies. Surv Ophthalmol. 

2026:S0039 -6257(26)00016 -0. 

5.  Badal VD, Vaccariello ED, Murray ER, Yu KE, Knight R, Jeste DV, Nguyen TT. The Gut 

Microbiome, Aging, and Longevity: A Systematic Review. Nutrients. 2020;12(12):3759. 

6.  Le Couteur DG, Solon -Biet SM, Cogger VC, Ribeiro R, de Cabo R, Raubenheimer D, Cooney 

GJ, Simpson SJ. Branched chain amino acids, aging and age -related health. Ageing Res Rev. 

2020;64:101198. 

7.  Ferrucci L, Fabbri E. Inflammageing: chronic inflammation in ageing, cardiovascular disease, 

and frailty. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2018;15(9):505 -522. 

8.  Ren J, Li H, Zeng G, Pang B, Wang Q, Wei J. Gut microbiome -mediated mechanisms in aging -

related diseases: are probiotics ready for prime time? Front Pharmacol. 2023;14:1178596. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

9.  Saeed H, Díaz LA, Gil -Gómez A, Burton J, Bajaj JS, Romero -Gomez M, Arrese M, Arab JP, Khan 

MQ.  Microbiome -centered therapies for the management of metabolic dysfunction -associated 

steatotic liver disease. Clin Mol Hepatol. 2025;31(Suppl):S94 -S111. 

10.  Tian H, Gao X, Du H, Lin Z, Huang X. Changes in microbial and metabolic profiles of mice fed 

with long -term high salt diet. BMC Gastroenterol. 2025;25(1):375. 

11.  Gao F, Wang C, Cao Z, Zhang X, Xi W, Liu Y, Zhan X, Jia M, Gou N, Yu L, Zhang Y, Guo Y, 

Wang W, Zhu F, Ma X, Gao Y. Nod2 deficiency exacerbates schizophrenia -related alterations in 

offspring of maternal immune activation in a sex -dependent manner. Brain Be hav Immun. 

2025;129:126 -142. 

12.  Sun X, Shukla M, Wang W, Li S. Unlocking gut -liver -brain axis communication metabolites: 

energy metabolism, immunity and barriers. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes. 2024;10(1):136. 

13.  Xiao J, Zhang JY, Luo W, He PC, Skondra D. The Emerging Role of Gut Microbiota in Age -

Related Macular Degeneration. Am J Pathol. 2023;193(11):1627 -1637. 

14.  Luo W, Skondra D. Implication of gut microbiome in age -related macular degeneration. Neural 

Regen Res. 2023;18(12):2699 -2700. 

15.  Dadgar N, Fung K, McClintic S, Metea C, Llorenç V, Saleh M, Nakamura YK, Jahrig C, Kiang L, 

Janowitz C, Davin S, Balter A, Le Cao KA, Karstens L, Martin TM, Klein ML, Lin P. Age -related 

Eye Disease Studies Supplements and Genetic Risk Score Are Crucial Det erminants of 

Intestinal Microbial Alterations in Advanced Age -Related Macular Degeneration. Ophthalmol Sci. 

2025;6(1):100920. 

16.  Seo DO, Holtzman DM. Current understanding of the Alzheimer's disease -associated 

microbiome and therapeutic strategies. Exp Mol Med. 2024;56(1):86 -94. 

17.  Chen C, Liao J, Xia Y, Liu X, Jones R, Haran J, McCormick B, Sampson TR, Alam A, Ye K. Gut 

microbiota regulate Alzheimer's disease pathologies and cognitive disorders via PUFA -

associated neuroinflammation. Gut. 2022;71(11):2233 -2252. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

18.  Palmer AK, Jensen MD. Metabolic changes in aging humans: current evidence and therapeutic 

strategies. J Clin Invest. 2022;132(16):e158451. 

19.  Johnson AA, Stolzing A. The role of lipid metabolism in aging, lifespan regulation, and age -

related disease. Aging Cell. 2019;18(6):e13048. 

20.  Gupta SK, Vyavahare S, Duchesne Blanes IL, Berger F, Isales C, Fulzele S. Microbiota -derived 

tryptophan metabolism: Impacts on health, aging, and disease. Exp Gerontol. 2023;183:112319. 

21.  Yu C, Roubeix C, Sennlaub F, Saban DR. Microglia versus Monocytes: Distinct Roles in 

Degenerative Diseases of the Retina. Trends Neurosci. 2020 Jun;43(6):433 -449. 

22.  Whitcup SM, Sodhi A, Atkinson JP, Holers VM, Sinha D, Rohrer B, Dick AD. The role of the 

immune response in age -related macular degeneration. Int J Inflam. 2013;2013:348092. 

23.  Chen M, Xu H. Parainflammation, chronic inflammation, and age -related macular degeneration. 

J Leukoc Biol. 2015;98(5):713 -25. 

24.  Wang C, Zong S, Cui X, Wang X, Wu S, Wang L, Liu Y, Lu Z. The effects of microglia -associated 

neuroinflammation on Alzheimer's disease. Front Immunol. 2023;14:1117172. 

25.  Chung HY, Kim DH, Lee EK, Chung KW, Chung S, Lee B, Seo AY, Chung JH, Jung YS, Im E, 

Lee J, Kim ND, Choi YJ, Im DS, Yu BP. Redefining Chronic Inflammation in Aging and Age -

Related Diseases: Proposal of the Senoinflammation Concept. Aging Dis. 2019;10(2):36 7-382. 

26.  Cummings NE, Lamming DW. Regulation of metabolic health and aging by nutrient -sensitive 

signaling pathways. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2017;455:13 -22. 

27.  Lushchak O, Strilbytska OM, Yurkevych I, Vaiserman AM, Storey KB. Implications of amino acid 

sensing and dietary protein to the aging process. Exp Gerontol. 2019;115:69 -78. 

28.  Darst BF, Koscik RL, Hogan KJ, Johnson SC, Engelman CD. Longitudinal plasma metabolomics 

of aging and sex. Aging (Albany NY). 2019;11(4):1262 -1282. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

29.  Zhang S, Wang Z, Wang Y, Zhu Y, Zhou Q, Jian X, Zhao G, Qiu J, Xia K, Tang B, Mutz J, Li J, Li 

B. A metabolomic profile of biological aging in 250,341 individuals from the UK Biobank. Nat 

Commun. 2024 Sep 15;15(1):8081. 

30.  Singh P, Gollapalli K, Mangiola S, Schranner D, Yusuf MA, Chamoli M, Shi SL, Lopes Bastos B, 

Nair T, Riermeier A, Vayndorf EM, Wu JZ, Nilakhe A, Nguyen CQ, Muir M, Kiflezghi MG, Foulger 

A, Junker A, Devine J, Sharan K, Chinta SJ, Rajput S, Rane A, Baumert P, Schönfelder M, 

Iavarone F, di Lorenzo G, Kumari S, Gupta A, Sarkar R, Khyriem C, Chawla AS, Sharma A, 

Sarper N, Chattopadhyay N, Biswal BK, Settembre C, Nagarajan P, Targoff KL, Picard M, Gupta 

S, Velagapudi V, Papenfuss AT, Kaya A, Ferreira MG, Kennedy BK, Andersen JK, Lithgow GJ, 

Ali AM, Mukhopadhyay A, Palotie A, Kastenmüller G, Kaeberlein M, Wackerhage H, Pal B, Yadav 

VK. Taurine deficiency as a driver of aging. Science. 2023;380(6649):eabn9257. 

31.  Dunn WB, Lin W, Broadhurst D, Begley P, Brown M, Zelena E, Vaughan AA, Halsall A, Harding 

N, Knowles JD, Francis -McIntyre S, Tseng A, Ellis DI, O'Hagan S, Aarons G, Benjamin B, Chew -

Graham S, Moseley C, Potter P, Winder CL, Potts C, Thornton P, McWhirter C , Zubair M, Pan 

M, Burns A, Cruickshank JK, Jayson GC, Purandare N, Wu FC, Finn JD, Haselden JN, Nicholls 

AW, Wilson ID, Goodacre R, Kell DB. Molecular phenotyping of a UK population: defining the 

human serum metabolome. Metabolomics. 2015;11(1):9 -26. 

32.  Austad SN, Smith JR, Hoffman JM. Amino acid restriction, aging, and longevity: an update. Front 

Aging. 2024;5:1393216. 

33.  Kumar U, Mehta P, Kumar S, Jain A, Guleria A, Kumar R V, Misra R, Kumar D. Circulatory 

histidine levels as predictive indicators of disease activity in takayasu arteritis. Anal Sci Adv. 

2021;2(11 -12):527 -535. 

34.  Li M, Wang H, Ren H, Zhang T, Zhou G, Chen S, Wang J, Jia X, Lai S, Gan X, Sun W. L -Histidine 

attenuates NEFA -induced inflammatory responses by suppressing Gab2 expression. Life Sci. 

2024;350:122672. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

35.  Flores V, Spicer AB, Sonsalla MM, Richardson NE, Yu D, Sheridan GE, Trautman ME, Babygirija 

R, Cheng EP, Rojas JM, Yang SE, Wakai MH, Hubbell R, Kasza I, Tomasiewicz JL, Green CL, 

Dantoin C, Alexander CM, Baur JA, Malecki KC, Lamming DW. Regulation of meta bolic health 

by dietary histidine in mice. 

36.  DiNicolantonio JJ, McCarty MF, OKeefe JH.  Role of dietary histidine in the prevention of obesity 

and metabolic syndrome. Open Heart. 2018;5(2):e000676. 

37.  Vera -Aviles M, Vantana E, Kardinasari E, Koh NL, Latunde -Dada GO.  Protective Role of 

Histidine Supplementation Against Oxidative Stress Damage in the Management of Anemia of 

Chronic Kidney Disease. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2018;11(4):111. 

38.  Kelly B, Pearce EL. Amino Assets: How Amino Acids Support Immunity. Cell Metab. 2020 Aug 

4;32(2):154 -175. 

39.  Ferreira AV, Domínguez -Andrés J, Merlo Pich LM, Joosten LAB, Netea MG. Metabolic 

Regulation in the Induction of Trained Immunity. Semin Immunopathol. 2024;46(3 -4):7. doi: 

10.1007/s00281 -024 -01015 -8. 

40.  van der Heijden CDCC, Noz MP, Joosten LAB, Netea MG, Riksen NP, Keating ST. Epigenetics 

and Trained Immunity. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2018;29(11):1023 -1040. 

41.  Schlüter T, van Elsas Y, Priem B, Ziogas A, Netea MG.  Trained immunity: induction of an 

inflammatory memory in disease. Cell Res. 2025;35(11):792 -802. 

42.  Quesada -Vázquez S, Castells -Nobau A, Latorre J, Oliveras -Cañellas N, Puig -Parnau I, Tejera 

N, Tobajas Y, Baudin J, Hildebrand F, Beraza N, Burcelin R, Martinez -Gili L, Chilloux J, Dumas 

ME, Federici M, Hoyles L, Caimari A, Del Bas JM, Escoté X, Fernández -Real JM, Mayneris -

Perxachs J. Potential therapeutic implications of histidine catabolism by the gut microbiota in 

NAFLD patients with morbid obesity. Cell Rep Med. 2023 Dec 19;4(12):101341. 

43.  Netea MG, Domínguez -Andrés J, Barreiro LB, Chavakis T, Divangahi M, Fuchs E, Joosten LAB, 

van der Meer JWM, Mhlanga MM, Mulder WJM, Riksen NP, Schlitzer A, Schultze JL, Stabell 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

Benn C, Sun JC, Xavier RJ, Latz E. Defining trained immunity and its role in health and disease. 

Nat Rev Immunol. 2020;20(6):375 -388 .

44.  Schlüter T, van Elsas Y, Priem B, Ziogas A, Netea MG.  Trained immunity: induction of an 

inflammatory memory in disease. Cell Res. 2025;35(11):792 -802. 

45.  Fanucchi S, Domínguez -Andrés J, Joosten LAB, Netea MG, Mhlanga MM. The Intersection of 

Epigenetics and Metabolism in Trained Immunity. Immunity. 2021 Jan 12;54(1):32 -43. 

46.  Mardinoglu A, Shoaie S, Bergentall M, Ghaffari P, Zhang C, Larsson E, Bäckhed F, Nielsen J. 

The gut microbiota modulates host amino acid and glutathione metabolism in mice. Mol Syst 

Biol. 2015;11(10):834. 

47.  Fiebiger U, Bereswill S, Heimesaat MM. Dissecting the Interplay Between Intestinal Microbiota 

and Host Immunity in Health and Disease: Lessons Learned from Germfree and Gnotobiotic 

Animal Models. Eur J Microbiol Immunol (Bp). 2016;6(4):253 -271. 

48.  Adams L, Hulme H, Dritsa C, Lynch C, Taylor V, Rasid O, Burchmore R, Goodwin RJA, Wall DM. 

Spatial metabolic and phenotypic characterization of the germ -free mouse model. Ann N Y Acad 

Sci. 202 5;1551(1):242 -256. 

49.  Behr C, Kamp H, Fabian E, Krennrich G, Mellert W, Peter E, Strauss V, Walk T, Rietjens IMCM, 

van Ravenzwaay B. Gut microbiome -related metabolic changes in plasma of antibiotic -treated 

rats. Arch Toxicol. 2017;91(10):3439 -3454. 

50.  Murali A, Giri V, Zickgraf FM, Ternes P, Cameron HJ, Sperber S, Haake V, Driemert P, Kamp H, 

Funk -Weyer D, Sturla SJ, Rietjens IMCM, van Ravenzwaay B. Connecting Gut Microbial 

Diversity with Plasma Metabolome and Fecal Bile Acid Changes Induced by the Anti biotics 

Tobramycin and Colistin Sulfate. Chem Res Toxicol. 2023 Apr 17;36(4):598 -616. 

51.  Behr C, Ramírez -Hincapié S, Cameron HJ, Strauss V, Walk T, Herold M, Beekmann K, Rietjens 

IMCM, van Ravenzwaay B. Impact of lincosamides antibiotics on the composition of the rat gut 

microbiota and the metabolite profile of plasma and feces. Toxicol Lett. 2018;296:139 -151. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

38 

52.  Quesada V, Freitas -Rodríguez S, Miller J, Pérez -Silva JG, Jiang ZF, Tapia W, Santiago -

Fernández O, Campos -Iglesias D, Kuderna LFK, Quinzin M, Álvarez MG, Carrero D, 

Beheregaray LB, Gibbs JP, Chiari Y, Glaberman S, Ciofi C, Araujo -Voces M, Mayoral P, Arango 

JR, Tamargo -Gómez I, Roiz -Valle D, Pascual -Torner M, Evans BR, Edwards DL, Garrick RC, 

Russello MA, Poulakakis N, Gaughran SJ, Rueda DO, Bretones G, Marquès -Bonet T, White KP, 

Caccone A, López -Otín C. Giant tortoise genomes provide insights into longevity and age -

related disease. Nat Ecol Evol. 2019;3(1):87 -95. 

53.  Zhang YP, Zhang WH, Zhang P, Li Q, Sun Y, Wang JW, Zhang SO, Cai T, Zhan C, Dong MQ. 

Intestine -specific removal of DAF -2 nearly doubles lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans with little 

fitness cost. Nat Commun. 2022 Oct 25;13(1):6339. 

54.  Lin K, Hsin H, Libina N, Kenyon C. Regulation of the Caenorhabditis elegans longevity protein 

DAF -16 by insulin/IGF -1 and germline signaling. Nat Genet. 2001 Jun;28(2):139 -45. 

55.  Ren J, Yang L, Zhu L, Xu X, Ceylan AF, Guo W, Yang J, Zhang Y. Akt2 ablation prolongs life 

span and improves myocardial contractile function with adaptive cardiac remodeling: role of 

Sirt1 -mediated autophagy regulation. Aging Cell. 2017;16(5):976 -987. 

56.  Nojima A, Yamashita M, Yoshida Y, Shimizu I, Ichimiya H, Kamimura N, Kobayashi Y, Ohta S, 

Ishii N, Minamino T. Haploinsufficiency of akt1 prolongs the lifespan of mice. PLoS One. 

2013;8(7):e69178. 

57.  Ghosh S, Sharma R, Bammidi S, Koontz V, Nemani M, Yazdankhah M, Kedziora KM, Stolz DB, 

Wallace CT, Yu -Wei C, Franks J, Bose D, Shang P, Ambrosino HM, Dutton JR, Geng Z, Montford 

J, Ryu J, Rajasundaram D, Hose S, Sahel JA, Puertollano R, Finkel T, Zigler JS Jr, Sergeev Y, 

Watkins SC, Goetzman ES, Ferrington DA, Flores -Bellver M, Kaarniranta K, Sodhi A, Bharti K, 

Handa JT, Sinha D. The AKT2/SIRT5/TFEB pathway as a potential therapeutic target in non -

neovascular AMD. Nat Commun. 2024;15(1):6150. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

39 

58.  Tang L, Cai N, Zhou Y, Liu Y, Hu J, Li Y, Yi S, Song W, Kang L, He H. Acute stress induces an 

inflammation dominated by innate immunity represented by neutrophils in mice. Front Immunol. 

2022;13:1014296. 

59.  Medina -Rodriguez EM, Han D, Lowell J, Beurel E. Stress promotes the infiltration of peripheral 

immune cells to the brain. Brain Behav Immun. 2023;111:412 -423. 

60.  La Cunza N, Tan LX, Thamban T, Germer CJ, Rathnasamy G, Toops KA, Lakkaraju A. 

Mitochondria -dependent phase separation of disease -relevant proteins drives pathological 

features of age -related macular degeneration. JCI Insight. 2021;6(9):e142254. 

61.  Andriessen EM, Wilson AM, Mawambo G, Dejda A, Miloudi K, Sennlaub F, Sapieha P. Gut 

microbiota influences pathological angiogenesis in obesity -driven choroidal neovascularization. 

EMBO Mol Med. 2016;8(12):1366 -1379. 

62.  Peng S, Li JJ, Song W, Li Y, Zeng L, Liang Q, Wen X, Shang H, Liu K, Peng P, Xue W, Zou B, 

Yang L, Liang J, Zhang Z, Guo S, Chen T, Li W, Jin M, Xing XB, Wan P, Liu C, Lin H, Wei H, Lee 

RWJ, Zhang F, Wei L. CRB1 -associated retinal degeneration is dependent on bacterial 

translocation from the gut. Cell. 2024;187(6):1387 -1401.e13. 

63.  Colijn JM, Meester -Smoor M, Verzijden T, de Breuk A, Silva R, Merle BMJ, Cougnard -Grégoire 

A, Hoyng CB, Fauser S, Coolen A, Creuzot -Garcher C, Hense HW, Ueffing M, Delcourt C, den 

Hollander AI, Klaver CCW; EYE -RISK Consortium. Genetic Risk, Lifestyle, and Age -Related 

Macular Degeneration in Europe: The EYE -RISK Consortium. Ophthalmology. 

2021;128(8):1039 -1049. 

64.  Krogh Nielsen M, Hector SM, Allen K, Subhi Y, Sørensen TL. Altered activation state of 

circulating neutrophils in patients with neovascular age -related macular degeneration. Immun 

Ageing. 2017;14:18. 

65.  Boyce M, Xin Y, Chowdhury O, Shang P, Liu H, Koontz V, Strizhakova A, Nemani M, Hose S, 

Zigler JS Jr, Campbell M, Sinha D, Handa JT, Kaarniranta K, Qian J, Ghosh S. Microglia -

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

40 

Neutrophil Interactions Drive Dry AMD -like Pathology in a Mouse Model. Cells. 

2022;11(22):3535. 

66.  Ghosh S, Padmanabhan A, Vaidya T, Watson AM, Bhutto IA, Hose S, Shang P, Stepicheva N, 

Yazdankhah M, Weiss J, Das M, Gopikrishna S, Aishwarya, Yadav N, Berger T, Mak TW, Xia S, 

Qian J, Lutty GA, Jayagopal A, Zigler JS Jr, Sethu S, Handa JT, Watkins SC, Gho sh A, Sinha D. 

Neutrophils homing into the retina trigger pathology in early age -related macular degeneration. 

Commun Biol. 2019;2:348. 

67.  Landowski M, Kelly U, Klingeborn M, Groelle M, Ding JD, Grigsby D, Bowes Rickman C. Human 

complement factor H Y402H polymorphism causes an age -related macular degeneration 

phenotype and lipoprotein dysregulation in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2019;116( 9):3703 -

3711. 

68.  Thee EF, Acar İE, Colijn JM, Meester -Smoor MA, Verzijden T, Baart SJ, Jarboui MA, Fauser S, 

Hoyng CB, Ueffing M, den Hollander AI, Klaver CCW; European Eye Epidemiology Consortium 

and EYE -RISK Project. Systemic Metabolomics in a Framework of Genetics and L ifestyle in 

Age -Related Macular Degeneration. Metabolites. 2023;13(6):701. 

69.  Laíns I, Duarte D, Barros AS, Martins AS, Gil J, Miller JB, Marques M, Mesquita T, Kim IK, 

Cachulo MDL, Vavvas D, Carreira IM, Murta JN, Silva R, Miller JW, Husain D, Gil AM. Human 

plasma metabolomics in age -related macular degeneration (AMD) using nuclear magn etic 

resonance spectroscopy. PLoS One. 2017;12(5):e0177749. 

70.  Chao de la Barca JM, Rondet -Courbis B, Ferré M, Muller J, Buisset A, Leruez S, Plubeau G, 

Macé T, Moureauzeau L, Chupin S, Tessier L, Blanchet O, Lenaers G, Procaccio V, Mirebeau -

Prunier D, Simard G, Gohier P, Miléa D, Reynier P. A Plasma Metabolomic Profi ling of Exudative 

Age -Related Macular Degeneration Showing Carnosine and Mitochondrial Deficiencies. J Clin 

Med. 2020;9(3):631. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

41 

71.  Franceschi C, Campisi J. Chronic inflammation (inflammaging) and its potential contribution to 

age -associated diseases. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2014;69 Suppl 1:S4 -9. 

72.  Baragetti A, Da Dalt L, Moregola A, Svecla M, Terenghi O, Mattavelli E, De Gaetano LN, Uboldi 

P, Catapano AL, Norata GD.  Neutrophil aging exacerbates high fat diet induced metabolic 

alterations. Metabolism. 2023;144:155576. 

73.  Lu J, Li H, Zhang G, Yang F, Zhang X, Ping A, Xu Z, Gu Y, Wang R, Ying D, Liu J, Zhang J, Shi 

L. Age -Related Alterations in Peripheral Immune Landscape with Magnified Impact on Post -

Stroke Brain. Research (Wash D C). 2023;6:0287. 

74.  Sennlaub F, Auvynet C, Calippe B, Lavalette S, Poupel L, Hu SJ, Dominguez E, Camelo S, Levy 

O, Guyon E, Saederup N, Charo IF, Rooijen NV, Nandrot E, Bourges JL, Behar -Cohen F, Sahel 

JA, Guillonneau X, Raoul W, Combadiere C. CCR2(+) monocytes infiltrate atr ophic lesions in 

age -related macular disease and mediate photoreceptor degeneration in experimental 

subretinal inflammation in Cx3cr1 deficient mice. EMBO Mol Med. 2013;5(11):1775 -93. 

75.  Liu A, Lv H, Wang H, Yang H, Li Y, Qian J. Aging Increases the Severity of Colitis and the Related 

Changes to the Gut Barrier and Gut Microbiota in Humans and Mice. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med 

Sci. 2020 Jun 18;75(7):1284 -1292. 

76.  Wang Y, Chen Y, Xiao Z, Shi Y, Fu C, Cao Y. Fecal microbiota transplantation modulates myeloid -

derived suppressor cells and attenuates renal fibrosis in a murine model. Ren Fail. 

2025;47(1):2480749. 

77.  Matheny RW Jr, Adamo ML. Role of Akt isoforms in IGF -I-mediated signaling and survival in 

myoblasts. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009;389(1):117 -21. 

78.  Babu VS, Ghosh S, Bammidi S, Jiwon R, Sharma R, Meyer D, Hose S, Pattabiraman PP, Sahel 

JA, Kidley NJ, Braz NF, Slater MJ, Lang S, Ghosh A, Yi J, Sripathi S, Rangaramanujam K, Bharti 

K, Sinha D. A non -canonical AKT1 -TERT pathway coordinates autophagy and E Rphagy. bioRxiv 

[Preprint]. 2025:2025.11.24.690135. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

42 

79.  Campello L, Singh N, Advani J, Mondal AK, Corso -Díaz X, Swaroop A. Aging of the Retina: 

Molecular and Metabolic Turbulences and Potential Interventions. Annu Rev Vis Sci. 

2021;7:633 -664. 

80.  Valapala M, Wilson C, Hose S, Bhutto IA, Grebe R, Dong A, Greenbaum S, Gu L, Sengupta S, 

Cano M, Hackett S, Xu G, Lutty GA, Dong L, Sergeev Y, Handa JT, Campochiaro P, Wawrousek 

E, Zigler JS Jr, Sinha D. Lysosomal -mediated waste clearance in retinal pigmen t epithelial cells 

is regulated by CRYBA1/ βA3/A1 -crystallin via V-ATPase -MTORC1 signaling. Autophagy. 

2014;10(3):480 -96. 

81.  Sharma R, George A, Nimmagadda M, Ortolan D, Karla BS, Qureshy Z, Bose D, Dejene R, 

Liang G, Wan Q, Chang J, Jha BS, Memon O, Miyagishima KJ, Rising A, Lal M, Hanson E, King 

R, Campos MM, Ferrer M, Amaral J, McGaughey D, Bharti K. Epithelial phenotype rest oring 

drugs suppress macular degeneration phenotypes in an iPSC model. Nat Commun. 

2021;12(1):7293. 

82.  Chatterjee S, Ghosh S, Sin Z, Babu VS, Preval LV, Davis E, Tran N, Bammidi S, Gautam P, Hose 

S, Sergeev Y, Flores -Bellver M, Ritter K, Jessen HJ, Al Diri I, Sinha D, Guha P. Age -Dependent 

Histone Deacetylase 3 Regulation by βA3/A1 -Crystallin and Inositol H exaphosphate in Retinal 

Pigmented Epithelial Cells Reveals a Novel Pathway in Age -Related Macular Degeneration. 

Aging Cell. 2025;24(9):e70163. 

83.  Wang S, Li W, Chen M, Cao Y, Lu W, Li X. The retinal pigment epithelium: Functions and roles 

in ocular diseases. Fundam Res. 2023;4(6):1710 -1718. 

84.  Anderson BD, Bell BA, Song Y, Lee TT, Wang T, Dunaief JL. Systemic Sodium Iodate Injection 

as a Model for Expanding Geographic Atrophy. Transl Vis Sci Technol. 2025;14(1):9. 

85.  Zlatar L, Mahajan A, Muñoz -Becerra M, Weidner D, Bila G, Bilyy R, Titze J, Hoffmann MH, Schett 

G, Herrmann M, Steffen U, Muñoz LE, Knopf J. Suppression of neutrophils by sodium 

exacerbates oxidative stress and arthritis. Front Immunol. 2023;14:1174537. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

43 

86.  Cassese M, Brignola C, Marrone S, Esposito G, Ammendola R, Cattaneo F. LAT1/SLC7A5 -

mediated amino acid uptake is regulated by redox signals triggered by formyl -peptide receptor 

2. FEBS J. 2025. In Press. 

87.  Voigt AP, Whitmore SS, Mulfaul K, Chirco KR, Giacalone JC, Flamme -Wiese MJ, Stockman A, 

Stone EM, Tucker BA, Scheetz TE, Mullins RF. Bulk and single -cell gene expression analyses 

reveal aging human choriocapillaris has pro -inflammatory phenotype. Microvasc Res. 

2020;131:104031. 

88.  Nasiri E, Sankowski R, Dietrich H, Oikonomidi A, Huerta PT, Popp J, Al -Abed Y, Bacher M. Key 

role of MIF -related neuroinflammation in neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment in 

Alzheimer's disease. Mol Med. 2020;26(1):34. 

89.  Jin C, Shao Y, Zhang X, Xiang J, Zhang R, Sun Z, Mei S, Zhou J, Zhang J, Shi L. A Unique Type 

of Highly -Activated Microglia Evoking Brain Inflammation via Mif/Cd74 Signaling Axis in Aged 

Mice. Aging Dis. 2021;12(8):2125 -2139. 

90.  Li C, Zhou L, Luo T, Sun H, Ma R, Wang J, Yang MM.  Integrative Multiomics Identifies CD64 ⁺

Monocytes as Potential Contributors to Age -Related Macular Degeneration. Invest Ophthalmol 

Vis Sci. 2025;66(12):32. 

91.  Abu El -Asrar AM, Ahmad A, Siddiquei MM, De Zutter A, Allegaert E, Gikandi PW, De Hertogh G, 

Van Damme J, Opdenakker G, Struyf S. The Proinflammatory and Proangiogenic Macrophage 

Migration Inhibitory Factor Is a Potential Regulator in Proliferative Diabetic Retinopathy. Front 

Immunol. 2019;10:2752. 

92.  Kelly CJ, Zheng L, Campbell EL, Saeedi B, Scholz CC, Bayless AJ, Wilson KE, Glover LE, 

Kominsky DJ, Magnuson A, Weir TL, Ehrentraut SF, Pickel C, Kuhn KA, Lanis JM, Nguyen V, 

Taylor CT, Colgan SP. Crosstalk between Microbiota -Derived Short -Chain Fatty Acid s and 

Intestinal Epithelial HIF Augments Tissue Barrier Function. Cell Host Microbe. 2015;17(5):662 -

71. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

44 

93.  Ericsson AC, Personett AR, Turner G, Dorfmeyer RA, Franklin CL. Variable Colonization after 

Reciprocal Fecal Microbiota Transfer between Mice with Low and High Richness Microbiota. 

Front Microbiol. 2017;8:196. 

94.  Hao Y, Stuart T, Kowalski MH, Choudhary S, Hoffman P, Hartman A, Srivastava A, Molla G, 

Madad S, Fernandez -Granda C, Satija R. Dictionary learning for integrative, multimodal and 

scalable single -cell analysis. Nat Biotechnol. 2024;42(2):293 -304. 

95.  Wolock SL, Lopez R, Klein AM. Scrublet: Computational Identification of Cell Doublets in Single -

Cell Transcriptomic Data. Cell Syst. 2019;8(4):281 -291.e9. 

96.  Wu T, Hu E, Xu S, Chen M, Guo P, Dai Z, Feng T, Zhou L, Tang W, Zhan L, Fu X, Liu S, Bo X, 

Yu G. clusterProfiler 4.0: A universal enrichment tool for interpreting omics data. Innovation 

(Camb). 2021;2(3):100141. 

97.  Vats K, Tian H, Singh K, Tyurina YY, Sparvero LJ, Tyurin VA, Kruglov O, Chang A, Wang J, Green 

F, Samovich SN, Zhang J, Chattopadhyay A, Murray N, Shah VK, Mathers AR, Chandran UR, 

Pilewski JM, Kellum JA, Wenzel SE, Bayır H, Kagan VE, Bunimovich YL. Ferroptosis of select 

skin epithelial cells initiates and maintains chronic systemic immune -mediated psoriatic d isease. 

J Clin Invest. 2024;135(2):e183219. 

98.  Sun X, Feng R, Li Y, Lin S, Zhang W, Li Y, Sun C, Li S. Histidine supplementation alleviates 

inflammation in the adipose tissue of high -fat diet -induced obese rats via the NF -κB- and PPAR γ-

involved pathways. Br J Nutr. 2014;112(4):477 -85. 

99.  Turnell DC, Cooper JDH. Rapid assay for amino acids in serum or urine by pre -column 

derivatization and reversed -phase liquid chromatography. Clin Chem. 1982;28(3):527 -531. 

100.  Stampina E, Tsiasioti A, Klimatsaki K, Zacharis CK, Tzanavaras PD.  Determination of 

histidine in human serum and urine by cation exchange chromatography coupled to selective 

on -line post column derivatization. Journal of Chromatography B. 2021;1173:122697. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

45 

101.  Tateda N, Matsuhisa K, Hasebe K, Kitajima N, Miura T. High -performance liquid 

chromatographic method for rapid and highly sensitive determination of histidine using 

postcolumn fluorescence detection with o -phthaldialdehyde. J Chromatogr B Biomed Sci Appl. 

1998;718(2):235 -241. 

102.  Zhang H, Gao S, Chen W. Automated recognition and analysis of head thrashes behavior 

in C. elegans. BMC bioinformatics. 2022;23(1):87. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

46 

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint 47 

Figure 1 : High fat diet modifies gut microbial communities in WT mice. (a) PCA biplot created with 

edgeR’s plotMDS shows gut microbiomes distributed over the first two principal components. (b)

Relative abundance summaries at phylum level . (c) Venn diagram comparing taxa detection (group 

level) in the two diet groups. (d) Alpha diversity (observed_species) comparisons between control and 

HFC groups summarized in boxplots. (e) Dendrogram summary of weighted unifrac based relatedness 

among HFC and control microbiomes. (f) LEfSe plot showing LDA scores of significantly differential 

taxa between the diet groups . (g) Violin plots of HFC enriched taxa. (h) Violin plots of taxa depleted in 

HFC . Significantly enriched metabolic pathways represented as ( i) over -representation analysis bar 

plot from serum metabolomics (GC -TOF MS) analysis in normal - and HFC -fed mice (arrow=significant 

enrichment of histidine metabolism pathway) . n=4. ( j) HPLC based quantitative estimation of histidine 

levels in mouse serum also showed similar downregulation in HFC -fed versus NC -fed floxed mice. n=3. 

(k) Correlation analysis showing inverse relationship between serum histidine levels and BMI among 

control donors. n=4. *P<0.05. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

48 

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint 49 

Figure 2 : HFC -induced metabolic stress promotes peripheral immune activation and retinal 

infiltration. (a) Percentage increase of circulating neutrophils in normal chow (NC) -fed Cryba1 cKO 

mice compared to floxed controls and HFC -fed animals from both genotype s compared to NC -fed mice .

n=4 . (b) CXCR2 (homeostatic marker) expression on circulating neutrophils showed decline in HFC -

fed cKO mice, compared to HFC -fed Cryba1 fl/fl (floxed controls) , whereas significant ly increase d

expression was observed in HFC -fed floxed control s, relative to NC -fed mice of the same genotype 

n=4 . (c) Circulating monocytes showed significant increase in HFC -fed cKO mice relative to HFC -fed 

floxed controls and NC -fed cKO animals . (d) The levels of CCR2 among monocytes also showed 

significant increase in HFC -fed animals from both genotypes and also in NC -fed cKO , compared to NC -

fed floxed mice . n=4. (e) LCN -2 and MPO levels were increase d in human neutrophils cultured with 

10% serum from CFH Y402H AMD donors , compared to CFH Y402 ( sibling control s; no AMD ). Histidine 

(10 mM) supplementation reduced the levels of these proteins . n=4. (f) DAPI staining of neutrophils 

cultured with 10% serum from CFH Y402H AMD donors showed noticeable formation of NETs (arrow) 

compared to those cultured with serum from their CFH Y402 sibling control s (no AMD ). This was 

rescued by histidine supplementation (asterisk) . n=5. Scale bar= 20 m. (g) Representative 

immunofluorescence and quantification of outer retina stained for CCR2 (red; asterisks) , phalloidin 

(green) , and DAPI (blue) , showed noticeable in filtration of CCR2+ cell s in the outer retina, upon HFC 

exposure to floxed and cKO mice . n=4. Scale bar=50 m. Data are mean ± SEM. *P<0.05, **P<0.01. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

50 

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint 51 

Figure 3 : Intestinal dysfunction links HFC exposure to systemic immune remodeling. (a)

Representative intestinal sections stained for E -cadherin and DAPI from Cryba1 fl/fl mice fed NC or HFC ,

showing robust downregulation of E-Cadherin (red) in HFC -diet. n=4. Scale bar=20 m. (b)

Representative immunofluorescence images (Phalloidin: Green) of intestinal sections with 

quantification of villus length from Cryba1 -floxed and cKO mice fed with NC or HFC , showing marked 

alterations (arrow) and decrease in villi length upon HFC exposure. n=4 . Scale bar=20 m. (c)

Schematic showing f ecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) experimental design. (d) Representative 

intestinal morphology in WT, WT+ HFC , and WT+ HFC +FMT groups stained with E -Cadherin (red) and 

phalloidin (green) showing protection of intestinal structure upon FMT treatment compared to HFC -

exposed mice without FMT (arrow) n=4 . Scale bar=20 m. (e) Percentage of circulating neutrophils 

(CD45 high CD11b high Ly6C +Ly6G high ) and (f) inflammatory monocytes/M -MDSCs 

(CD45 high CD11b high Ly6C +Ly6G low ) relative to myeloid cells showed significant and expected 

upregulation in HFC -exposed mice, compared to normal chow fed animals. FMT treatment reduced the 

levels of circulating ( e) neutrophils and showed ( f) relative increase in the levels of inflammatory 

monocytes/M -MDSCs , compared to HFC -exposed mice without FMT. n=3. Data are mean ± SEM. 

*P<0.05, **P<0.01. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

52 

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint 53 

Figure 4 : IGF1R/AKT2 signaling regulates inflammatory and epigenetic remodeling under 

metabolic stress . PCR analysis in synchronized C. elegans showed significant increase in the gene 

expression of immune regulators like ( a) Mek -2 and ( b) Tir -1 upon high fat (HF) exposure for 72 h, 

which was reduced when auxin (1 mM) was added to degrade intestinal Daf2 specifically or by histidine 

supplementation (10 mM). n=3. (c) Akt2 gene expression in Daf2 ins C. elegans following HF exposure 

was marked ly increased , but was reduced significantly upon treatment with auxin ( 1 mM ). n=3 . (d)

Global DNA methylation (5mC ) levels were significantly elevated in transgenic Akt2 -GFP worms 

exposed to HF , compared to WT+HF worms, which w ere rescued upon AKT2 -PSM ( AKT2i ) or histidine 

treatment. (WT+HF and transgenic Akt2 -GFP+HF; n=7, transgenic Akt2 -GFP+HF+AKT2 i and 

transgenic Akt2 -GFP+HF+histidine; n=4 ). (e) Schematic of the health span assay, which was performed 

in a single well of a six -well plate. The plate is illuminated from below with an infrared (IR) LED array. 

Transmitted light passes through a long -pass filter (LPF) before being captured by a camera. The 

zoomed -in view shows the camera field of view, in which each well is subdivided into four regions, 

allowing four e xperimental conditions to be recorded simultaneously. After 24h, (f) head angle bending 

is noticeably increasing in HF -exposed Daf2 ins worms which was reduced upon AKT2 -PSM (AKT2i) 

and histidine supplementation. n=3. Data are mean ± SEM. *P<0.05, **P<0.01. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

54 

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint 55 

Figure 5 : Cryba1 deficiency triggers predisposition to metabolic and inflammatory insults in the 

RPE . (a) UMAP (Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection) plot from scRNAseq of RPE /choroid 

isolated from aged (15 -month -old) WT and Cryba1 cKO mice reveals heterogeneous RPE 

subpopulations as well as several immune and ot her cell types . n=3. Heat map showing pathway 

enrichment in each (b) RPE sub -populations and (c) cross -species comparative transcriptomic analysis 

between mouse Cryba1 cKO RPE clusters and human iPSC -derived RPE from CFH Y402H AMD 

donors . The enrichment showing inflammatory ( green arrows) and metabolic (red arrows) pathways ,

indicat ing transcriptional programs suggestive of accelerated cellular aging in both Cryba1 -deficient 

mouse RPE and human AMD RPE. n=3. (d) Integrated scRNAseq analysis of RPE /choroid from 3 - and 

15 -month -old WT and Cryba1 cKO mice demonstrating differential Slc7a5 expression across cell 

populations. Slc7a5 gene expression is significantly altered in specific RPE clusters (clusters 16 and 

27) in Cryba1 -floxed and cKO mice at both ages, indicating persistent histidine metabolism 

reprogramming during aging and disease progression . n=3. (e) H3K27ac ChIP -seq tracks at the Slc7a5 

(yellow highlighted inset) locus (chr8:121,895,526 –121,895,926) in RPE from 4-months -old Cryba1 fl/fl 

and cKO mice. Floxed replicates show prominent H3K27ac enrichment within an intronic regulatory 

region, indicative of active enhancer activity. This acetylation peak is markedly reduced in cKO RPE 

(individual and combined track views), consistent with decreased chromatin acce ssibility and reduced 

Slc7a5 expression, linking Cryba1 loss to histidine transport and mTORC1 dysregulation. (f) Functional 

RPE -mediated immune clearance assay was performed, after pre -treatment for 6 hours with 

recombinant MIF (1 ng) , amino acid free med ia, or MIF+amino acid free media, followed by staining 

these cells with CMTPX -red and then co -cultur ing them with WT RPE explants for 24 hours. 

Quantification of residual CMTPX -positive cells demonstrates significantly reduced immune cell 

clearance following MIF and amino acid free media treatment, which was maximum when immune cells 

were exposed to MIF+amino acid free media , compared to untreated controls, indicating impaired RPE -

mediated immune resolution under nutrient stress. n=4. (g) Flow cytometric analysis of treated immune 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

56 

cells showing selective upregulation of CD74 (FITC -A) in CD45 high CD11b high Ly6C +Ly6G high neutrophils 

following MIF, amino acid deprivation, or combined treatment. n=3. Data are mean ± SEM. *P<0.05, 

**P<0.01. 

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint 57 

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint 58 

Figure 6 : Targeting systemic AKT2 and histidine signaling could potentially reduce HFC -

mediated peripheral immune activation and exacerbation of retinal degeneration . (a)

Quantification of dysmorphic RPE (arrows) in Cryba1 fl/fl and cKO RPE flat mounts from mice fed with 

either NC or HFC . HFC exposure significantly increases number of dysmorphic RPE mice in cKO mice, 

indicating exacerbation of structural degeneration under metabolic stress. Such changes were not 

visualized in HFC -fed floxed mice. n=4. (b) Experimental schematic of acute dry AMD model induced 

by NaIO ₃ under HFC conditions with histidine supplementation or AKT2 -PSM (AKT2i) therapy . (c)

Representative immunohistochemical images of outer retinal layers following NaIO ₃ treatment with or 

without HFC exposure. NaIO3 and HFC +NaIO ₃ induces photoreceptor degeneration (rhodopsin loss; 

arrows) and RPE damage as evident from reduced EBP50 expression (asterisk). Histidine 

supplementation or AKT 2-PSM (AKT2i) therapy in HFC +NaIO ₃ treated mice rescue d these anomalies .

n=3. Scale bar= 20 m. Flow cytometric quantification of (d) CD45 high CD11b high Ly6C +Ly6G high 

neutrophils and ( e) CX3CR1 + mononuclear phagocytes (CD45 high Ly6G -F4/80 +) in peripheral blood 

showing that HFC +NaIO ₃ significantly increases neutrophil levels compared to WT and NaIO ₃-only 

groups, indicating diet -driven immune activation. AKT2 -PSM (AKT2i) therapy effectively restores 

neutrophil levels toward baseline, whereas histidine supplementation produces a relative but not 

statistically significant reduction. n=3. (f) Schematic showing that HFC treatment triggered gut 

microbiome and structural alterations , peripheral metabolic (decrease in histidine levels) and immune 

alterations with upregulated CD74 expression in neutrophils. These cells are able to infiltrate the retina 

and interact with RPE -derived MIF triggering a chronic inflammation and subsequent retinal 

degeneration as seen in AMD. Data are mean ± SEM. *P<0.05, **P<0.01. 

> (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint

59 

Movie -1: C. elegans health span. Movie showing movement of C. elegans in chamber explained in 

Figure 4 with untreated, HF -exposed, HF+ AKT2 -PSM (AKT2i) and HF+histidine exposed Daf2 ins 

worms. 

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 20, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718497 doi: bioRxiv preprint