Title: Music-Inspired Acoustic-Piezoelectric Stimulation Accelerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
Johnston et al. 20 26 (preprint) 1

# Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezo electric Stimulation 

# Accelerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs 

# Therapeutic Function 

James Joh nston a, Erin Boyce b, Tiago Thomaz Migliati Zanon a, Hyunsu Jeon a, Courtney Khong a, Yun 

Young Cho ia, Nosang V . Myung a, Martin Nunez a, Mae -Lin Pinkstaff a, and Yichun Wang a*

> a

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 , USA 

> b

Independent Music Producer 

*Correspondence should be addressed to Y.W . (ywang65 @nd .edu )

Keywords: Extracellular Ve sicles, Music, Piezoelectric Stimulation, Macrophage Polarization, Therape utics 

Macrophage small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) carry phenotype -linked cargo and bioactivity for immunomodulation 

and regeneration, but therapeutic translation is limited by low secretion and poor control of function. We introduce a 

music -activated piezoele ctric nanofiber substrate (PES) that converted audible sound into programmable electrical 

stimulation to enhance sEV biogenesis while tuning macrophage polarization. Adjusting acoustic parameters increased 

sEV yield, while musically inspired “assemblies” b iased macrophage phenotypes: dissonant, low -frequency stimuli pro-

moted M1 -like inflammation, whereas consonant, higher -frequency stimuli favored M2 -like, regenerative states. These 

shifts produced distinct sEV cargo and bioactivities. We rationally designe d customized music stimulus that maximized 

both vesicle production and M2 bias, yielding sEVs exhibited regeneration potentials. This work establishes a program-

mable acoustic –piezoelectric strategy to scale macrophage sEV production while tailoring their t herapeutic potency. 

1. Introduction 

Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) are nature -derived, li-

pid -based nanoparticles that that mediate intercellular 

communication and are emerging as a versatile therapeutic 

modality for cancer therapy, immunomodulation, and tis-

sue regeneration. [1 –5] In particular, sEVs secreted by tis-

sue -resident macrophages are attractive because their mo-

lecular cargo and resulting bioactivity are tightly coupled to 

the activation state of the parent cells, enabling phenotype -

dependent modulation of immune responses and regenera-

tive processes. [6,7] Yet, realizing the full therapeutic po-

tential of macrophage -derived sEVs will require strategies 

that enhance secretion and enable tunable control over 

their native functions. [8,9] 

Piezoelectricity is a pervasive feature of biological tissues 

and extracellular matrices (ECM), providing cells with dy-

namic electrical cues that influence mechanotransduction 

and cell state. [10,11] Inspired by this feature, piezoelectric 

materials have been leveraged to stimulate cells and en-

hance sEV production by converting mechanical inputs into 

electrical stimulation. [12 –15] The resulting electrical out-

puts can be programmed through acoustic parameters such 

as frequency, amplitude, timbre, and harmonic structure, 

well established in audible acoustic sensing systems. 

[16,17] Hence, ECM –mimetic piezoelectric platforms may 

provide a unified strategy to both enhance sEV biogenesis 

and reprogram key cellular pathways that govern the com-

position and functional potency of the resulting sEVs. 

Meanwhile, acoustic stimuli are biologically relevant signals 

for innate immune cells. Macrophages exhibit measurable 

responses to audible sound exposures, including shifts in 

cytokine expression associated with polarization state. 

[18,19] Prior studies report that music dominated by con-

sonant, higher -frequency components (e.g., classical and 

opera) is associated with increased anti -inflammatory cyto-

kines, aligning with regeneration phenotypes. [20,21] Con-

versely, intense or dysregulated stimulation can promote 

proinflammatory signaling, desirable in select immunother-

apy contexts. [19,22,23] Related approaches, such as vi-

broacoustic therapies (VAT), use bulk low frequency waves 

(20 -150 Hz) to modulate immune system through com-

bined mechanical and bioelectrical pathways at the cellular 

level. [24 –27] However, how music -theory features beyond 

basic acoustic parameters translate through the piezoelec-

tric elements of native tissues and the ECM into bioelectrical 

cues that program innate immune system remains poorly 

understood, limiting the rational desig n of acoustic -piezoe-

lectric regimens for immunomodulation and regenerative 

medicine. 

Here we introduce a music -activated piezoelectric nano-

fiber substrate (PES) to transduce audible acoustic waves to     

> preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function
> Johnston et al. 20 26(preprint) 2

cellular electrical stimulation, enabling regulation of macro-

phage -derived sEV production and macrophage polariza-

tion ( Fig. 1 ). We show that PES activation significantly ac-

celerate sEV production and that musically inspired acous-

tic “assemblies” can bias macrophage polarization to tune 

sEV bioactivity. Finally, we engineered a customized regen-

erative musical stimulus that jointl y optimizes sEV produc-

tion and regeneration function, yielding high sEV concen-

tration and enhanced osteoblast proliferation and gap clo-

sure. Together, this music -inspired acoustic –piezoelectric 

platform provides a programmable strategy to scale sEV 

production while simultaneously tailoring therapeutic 

properties through phenotype control. 

Human disease models have become increasingly 

important in drug development due to the high failure rate 

of drug candidates in clinical trials . Despite a 44% increase 

in R&D expenditures by the top 15 pharma companies since 

2016, reaching $133 billion in 2021, the drug attrition rate 

hit an all -time high of 95% that year. [1] Most drugs fail in 

clinical stages despite proven efficacy and safety in animal 

models, largely because clinical trial decisions rely almost 

exclusively on animal -derived data. This translational gap 

has led to no significant increase in new drug approval s

despite growing investments in pharmaceutical R&D .[2] 

While human dise ase models based on 2D culture have 

widely been used for high -content (HC) and high -

throughput (HT) screening (HCHTS), 2D culture 

environments offer cells a relatively simple and uniform 

environment .[3,4] Such models are not sufficient to represent 

complex phenomena, such as tissue structures, [5,6] spatial 

cell populations ,[7,8] and dynamic physiological 

processes, [9,10] leading to differences in drug deliveries and 

efficacies. [11,12] Hence , there has been a critical need to 

develop more reliable and accura te human disease models 

in vitro to better mimic the native environment, including 

tissue architecture in 3D coordinates, cell -cell, cell -

extracellular matrix (ECM), and ECM -drug interactions. [13] 

To address the translational gap, 3D cell culture 

techniques have emerged as promising solutions, with 

various human disease models developed over recent 

decades, including cellular spheroids, organoids, and 

scaffold ed tissue models. [3] Cellular spheroid s and 

organoids , as scaffold -free 3D micro -physiological systems, 

effectively replicate tissue structures and functions, 

creating a more physiologically relevant environment for 

cellular activities .[9] By spontaneously mimicking in vivo 

conditions through th e expression of ECM, they not only 

promote physiologically reliable cellular behavior ( e.g. , cell 

differentiation, proliferation, signaling, and drug response 

in in -vivo conditions) [14,15] but also allow dynamically 

precise molecular behavior (e.g. , diffusion, transport, 

accumulation, and drug delivery within the 3D cellular 

system). [12,16] Furthermore, the spherical geometry of 

cell ular spheroids offers a straightforward 3D spatial 

coordinate system that closely mimics real tissue, 

representing cell -cell , cell -ECM , or ECM -ECM 

interactions. [17] This simplification facilitates efficient 

monitoring /tracking and mathematical modeling of drug 

transport and efficacies as well as cell responses within the 

3D cellular environment. [18 –20] To achieve 3D HCHTS that 

are compatible with traditional drug screening methods [3,21] 

and adaptable to advanced artificial intelligence (AI) or 

machine learning (ML) analys is,[3,22] various methodologies ,

such as hanging -drop method, [23] bioreactor culture, [24] 

suspension culture ,[25] and well -plate -based pellet 

culture ,[26] have been introduced to parallelize the 

generation, culturing, and analysis of spheroids and 

organoids. However , these methods exhibit spheroid 

throughput/content scalability limitations and/or spheroid 

size dispersity ,[27] showing a notable trade -off between the 

two features. Additionally, many of these methodologies for 

3D HCHTS require complicated operation or are not 

compatible with the conventional readouts for drug testing, 

further complicating their adoption in both static and 

dynamic systemic analy sis (e.g. , endpoint or one -point 

analysis; in -situ , continuous, or real -time analysis) .[3,28] 

2.  Methods  

> 2.1. Materials and Reagents

Polyacrylonitrile (PAN; 181315), sodium borohydride 

(213462), and Pluronic f -127 powder (9003 -11 -6) were 

purchased from Sigma Aldrich (MA). N,N -Dimethylforma-

mide (DMF; D119 -4) was purchased from Fischer Scientific 

(MA). Ethyl alcohol (3791 -10), 99% acetic acid (BDH3092) 

and 0.22 μm vacuum filters (76010 -388) were purchased 

from VWR (PA). Chitosan powder (c1569) was purchased 

from Spectrum Chemical (NJ). Minimum essential medium 

(MEM; 10 -010 -CV) and Corning SpinX centrifuge filters 

(431491) were purchased fr om Corning (NY). Fetal bovine 

serum (FBS; 26140079), 100× antibiotic –antimycotic 

(15240062), 0.25% trypsin –EDTA (25200072), and Presto-

blue (A13261) were purchased from ThermoFisher (MA). 

4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (15735) 

was purchased f rom Electron Microscopy Science (PA). Cell 

counting kit -8 (CCK -8; 850 -039 -kl01) was purchased from 

Enzo Life Sciences (NY). The LIVE/DEAD ™ cell imaging kit 

(488/570) was purchased from Thermofisher Scientific 

(MA).  

> 2.2. Preparation of PAN solution and PAN nanofiber scaf-
> folds

Solution property characteristics were performed similarly 

to prior work. [12,45] Solution viscosity was measured 

> preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function 

Johnston et al. 20 26 (preprint) 3

using a CPA -40 spindle connected to a Brookfield DV -I

Prime viscometer (Brookfield, Toronto, Canada). The rota-

tional speed of the spindle was ramped up from 0.5 rpm to 

whichever speed at which the torque reached closest to 

100% (at least above 95%). After confirming that viscosity 

was independent of the shear rate, the viscosity value at 

maximum torque was recorded. Surface tension was meas-

ured using an automatic surface tensiometer (QBZY -1; 

Shanghai Fangrui Instrument, Shanghai, China), which had 

a platinum -coated plate connected to a hook. The force ex-

erted on the hook as the plate came in contact with the so-

lution was converted into surface tension values Arduino 

code (Atlas Scientific, NY) was used to take electrical con-

ductivity measurement through a glass -body electrical con-

ductivity probe (K = 0.1, Oakton) paired with an embedded 

conductivity circuit (EZO -EC; Atlas Scientific, NY) and an 

Arduino Uno Rev3 board. All solution property measure-

ments were taken at room temperature immediately before 

or after electrospinning to correlate them most closely with 

the resulting nanofiber properties. Nanofibers with a diam-

eter of 760 nm were produced through an electrospinning 

process. A solution of 10 wt% PAN was prepared in DMF. 

Electrospinning was carried out under specific conditions, 

namely an electrospinning distance of 10 cm, an applied 

voltage of 13 kV, and a solution feed rate of 1 mL h -1 . This 

process was conducted in a controlled environment of 23 °C 

and 40% relative humidity. The resulting nanofibers were 

collected on a rotating collector drum covered with alumi-

num foil, operating at 400 rpm. The electrospinning          

> Figure 1–Overview schematic of the piezoelectric nanofiber substrate (PES) platform with various acoustic stimuli. The PES
> platform mimics the piezoelectrically sensitive extracellular matrix that macrophages adhere to in a tissue. Using this pheno menon,
> this platform can take advantage of acoustic frequency power and harmonic density to differentiate the small extrace llular vesicle
> (sEV) production and cellular phenotype. EDM music utilizes low frequency power with high dissonance at low frequencies resul ting
> in high sEV production, but with promoted inflammation. A selected classical music stimulus takes advantage of powerful high fre-
> quency, and high dissonance in frequencies above 200 Hz which promotes regeneration but suffers from low sEV Production. Cust om -
> made regenerative music is a hybrid stimulus that takes advantage of both the power in low frequencies and the dissonance in high
> frequencies to promote sEV production while also promoting regeneration. Figure made in Biorender.
> preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function
> Johnston et al. 20 26(preprint) 4

duration was optimized to achieve nanofibers with the de-

sired thickness of approximately 100 μm.  

> 2.3. Piezoelectric property measurement

Nanofiber scaffolds were prepared in a cantilever setup, 

similar to prior work. [12,45] This setup allows for the con-

trolled application of strain to the samples while simultane-

ously measuring their electrical output. The PAN nanofiber 

scaffolds were cut into strips of size 4 × 1.2 cm, and brass 

slabs of size 7.2 × 1.6 × 0.01 cm, electricall y isolated with 

polyimide tape, were employed as electrodes to measure 

the voltage. One brass slab was in direct contact with the 

nanofiber sample, secured with double -sided copper tape, 

while the other slab remained unexposed. Two 24 -gauge 

wires were sold ered to these electrodes, sealed with polyi-

mide tape, and connected to a breadboard with inputs to a 

PicoScope 2204A (Pico Technology Ltd, Cambridgeshire, 

UK) for voltage measurement. To induce controlled strain, 

a 2.3 g proof mass was placed on the cantil ever’s end, driven 

by a custom -made oscillatory system, with the cantilever 

holder clamped atop a subwoofer diaphragm. A sinusoidal 

sine wave with a controlled amplitude and frequency was 

applied to the speaker system, and the voltage output was 

measured.  

> 2.4. Scanning electron microscopy images of PES

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Thermo Prima envi-

ronmental -SEM; ThermoFisher, MA) was used to image 

samples with and without cells. Cell -free samples were fixed 

on a metallic stud (75210; Electron Microscopy Science, PA) 

with double sided conductive tap e and sputter -coated with 

gold before imaging under 10 kV. The sample thickness, av-

erage fiber diameter, and pore size were measured based 

on the SEM images using the ImageJ software.  

> 2.5. 2D Cell culture and media collection

Mouse macrophage cell line (RAW264.7) was purchased 

from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and 

were cultured in T75 flasks at a density of 2E6 cells per well 

in DMEM/high glucose medium containing 10% FBS and 

1% antibiotic -antimycotic. The medium was exchanged 

every 48 hours. Once the culture reached 70% confluency, 

the cells were washed with PBS 3 times, replaced with EV 

depleted medium, and incubated for 24 hours before collec-

tion for sEV isolation. Cells were then harvested after media 

collecti on with trypsin –EDTA for 5 min followed by spin-

ning down the cells at 1100 rpm for 4 min. The cells were 

resuspended in fresh MEM and diluted appropriately to be 

counted using a hemocytometer.  

> 2.6. PES Cell culture and media collection

The scaffolds were cut into 3 cm x 1.5 cm strips and pro-

cessed for seeding, which included washing, coating with 

chitosan for cell adhesion, and sterilization. Each sample 

was rinsed in distilled water for 30 min and transferred to 

a solution of 1 mg mL−1 chitosan in 0.1 M acetic acid for 30 

min. The coated nanofiber scaffolds were then rinsed with 

fresh distilled wa ter for 30 min and air dried. The processed 

samples were placed in a 60 mm diameter Petri dish and 

UV -sterilized for 30 minutes before seeding. RAW264.7 

cells were passaged and seeded separately at 5E5 cells per 

scaffold. The seeded scaffolds were then incubated for 30 

min at 37 °C before the addition of serum -containing MEM 

and incubation at 37 °C and 5% CO2. After 48 h, the condi-

tioned medium w as replaced with serum -free medium and 

incubated for 24 h before being collected for sEV isolation. 

Cells were then counted after media collection using a cell 

counting kit -8 assay: The culture medium was aspirated, 

and the scaffolds were washed with PBS 3 times before add-

ing 3% CCK -8 reagent in the cell culture media and incuba-

tion for 2 hours at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The cell count was 

then measured through the absorbance at 460 nm wave-

length.  

> 2.7. Cell seeding efficiency for PES culture

A cell seeding efficiency measurement testing was per-

formed based on a previous study (ref): RAW264.7 cells 

were seeded separately on 2 mm × 2 mm scaffolds ( N = 3) 

with and without a chitosan coating at a density of 5 × 10^3 

cells per scaffold and incubated in serum -containing MEM 

at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 24 h. The cultured medium was as-

pirated, and the scaffolds were washed with PBS thrice be-

fore the addition o f 10% CCK -8 reagent in cell culture media 

and incubation for 4 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The cell cou nt 

was then measured through absorbance at 460 nm wave-

length. Chitosan coated scaffolds were used for future cell 

culture tests.  

> 2.8. Cell proliferation test

RAW264.7 cells were seeded separately on 2 mm × 2 mm 

scaffolds ( N = 3) at 1E3 cells per scaffold and incubated at 

different set time periods (0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13 days). 

Media was replaced every day, and confluency was moni-

tored. The media was aspirated, and the scaffolds were 

washed with PBS thrice before the addition of 10% CCK -8

reagent in cell culture media and incubation for 4 h at 37 °C 

and 5% CO2. The cell count was then measured through ab-

sorbance at 460 nm wavelength.  

> 2.9. Acoustic environment characterization

The acoustic stimulation environment was characterized 

using a microphone coupled with the DecibelX application. 

The volume and pitch settings were adjusted to achieve an 

appropriate average amplitude and frequency according to 

the DecibelX application. Th e average amplitude and fre-

quency was measured over a period of 5 minutes in an     

> preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function
> Johnston et al. 20 26(preprint) 5

acoustic controlled environment blocking external noise. 

Acoustic environments were created with a range of 50 -110 

dB amplitude and 50 -1000 Hz frequency using this process.  

> 2.10. sEV isolation and concentration measurement

sEVs were isolated from the media via size -based separa-

tion. The isolated media first went through a 0.22 μm filter 

to capture larger vesicles and cell debris. The flowthrough 

solution was then added to a 100 kDa centrifuge filter and 

centrifuged at 200 g for 4 × 30 min time periods; the mixture 

was washed with PBS between each centrifuge session. The 

sEV solution was then concentrated down to 1 mL for sEV 

characterization. The sEV concentration and size distribu-

tion were measured through nanoparticle trac king analysis 

(NTA; Nanosight NS300; Ma lvern, Worcestershire, UK). 

Samples were diluted appropriately to maintain accurate 

particle counts. For each sample, five 60 s videos were ac-

quired at a camera level of 8 and detection threshold of 2. 

The laser chamber was cleaned with milliQ water betwee n

each sample reading to ensure no sample contamination oc-

curred. The videos were analyzed using the NTA3.0 soft-

ware to obtain particle concentration, along with the mean 

and mode particle sizes of each sample.  

> 2.11. Acoustic stimulation and media collection

PES cultures containing serum -free medium were stimu-

lated using sinusoidal acoustic waves (3 -Ω subwoofer; PS -

EW1 -2; Samsung Electronics, Suwon -si, Republic of Korea) 

in an acoustically controlled box. Samples were stimulated 

for 15 minutes at various ampli tude levels (50 -110 dB) and 

frequencies (50 -1000 Hz) levels. The samples were incu-

bated at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 24 hours before being col-

lected for sEV isolation. For the music study, the PES cul-

tures were stimulated with the appropriate song for 15 

minute s followed by incubation at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 24 

hours before being collected for sEV isolation.  

> 2.12. Acoustic characterization of Music Tracks

An audio input file was imported into a python code and the 

time -based frequency, waveform, and overall frequencies 

were plotted. Waveform was determined through plotting 

the wave amplitude as a function of time. The frequency was 

determined through applyi ng a fast Fourier transform on 

the wave amplitude. Stimuli plotted in the study included 

basic sine waveforms at different frequencies, square wave-

forms, triangle waveforms, sawtooth waveforms, instru-

ments played at 250 Hz Frequency, and tested music track s.  

> 2.13. Dissonance calculations of Music Tracks

Dissonance  𝐷 𝑓  was calculated and summed up over each fre-

quency at a given time using the following equations: 

𝐷 𝑓 = 1

2 ∗ ∑ ∑ 𝑑 (𝑓 𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑗 , 𝜈 𝑖 , 𝜈 𝑗 )

> 𝑛
> 𝑗 =1
> 𝑛
> 𝑖 =1

𝑑 (𝑓 𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑗 , 𝜈 𝑖 , 𝜈 𝑗 ) = 𝜈 𝑖𝑗 (𝑒 −𝑎𝑠 (𝑓 𝑗 −𝑓 𝑖 ) − 𝑒 −𝑏𝑠 (𝑓 𝑗 −𝑓 𝑖 ))

𝑠 = 𝑑 ∗

(𝑠 1𝑓 𝑖 + 𝑠 2)

𝜈 𝑖𝑗 = 𝜈 𝑖 𝜈 𝑗 

Where  𝑓  is frequency,  𝜈  is amplitude, and s is an interpola-

tion parameter between two frequencies which are deter-

mined to be 0.021 and 19 based on least squared fit model-

ing. The constants a and b, and d* were deciphered con-

stants from previous calculations of local dissonance. [46] 

The average dissonance was calculated over the time -length 

of the stimuli and normalized between 0 and 1. Consonance 

was then calculated using the following equation: 

𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 = 1 − 𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 

These values were used as the horizontal portion of the ra-

dar plot.  

> 2.14. Cytokine release measurement of cells on stimu-
> lated PES

IL6 and IL10 cytokines were detected using an ELISA kit 

from Thermofisher (IL6 – 88 -7064 -88, IL10 - 88 -7105 -88). 

The manufacturer’s protocol was followed for the test: 96 

well ELISA plates were coated with capture antibody in the 

coating buffer. The plates were sealed and incubated over-

night at 4C. The wells were aspirated and washed 3 times 

with PBS. Each sample was soaked for 1 minute for each 

wash step followed by blotting the plate on absorbent paper 

to remove any residual buffer. Wells were then blocked 

with ELISA Diluent (1X) and incubated at room tempera-

ture for 1 hour. T he diluent was aspirated and washed once 

followed by the incubation of antigen standard and culture 

supernatant overnight at 4C. The sample was aspirated and 

washed 3 times followed by adding the antibody detection 

to all wells and incubating at room tempe rature for 1 hour. 

The wells were aspirated and washed 3 more times. Avidin -

HRP (IL6) or Streptavidin -HRP (IL10) was added and incu-

bated at room temperature for 1 hour, followed by 5 more 

washes. TMB solution was added to each well and incubated 

at room te mperature for 15 minutes. Stop solution (2M sul-

furic acid) was added to each well and the absorbance at 

450 nm was measured using a microplate reader. Protein 

concentration was calculated using the standard curve ab-

sorbance measurements.      

> preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function
> Johnston et al. 20 26(preprint) 6
> 2.15. Flow Cytometry

Cells were detached using enzyme -free dissociation buffer 

and the stained with either CD86 -PE, or CD206 -PE for 30 

minutes at 4C. Cells were washed 5 times with FACS buffer 

and tested for fluorescence using a cytek Norther Lights 

(NL) -CLC flow cytometer. Po sitive controls for CD86 con-

sisted of RAW264.7 cells that were stimulated with LPS for 

12 hours before detachment. Positive controls for CD206 

consisted of RAW264.7 cells that were stimulated with IL10 

for 12 hours before detachment. Fluorescence results w ere 

analyzed through FlowJo.  

> 2.16. Western blot

sEVs were lysed with 1× RIPA buffer (9806; Cell Signaling 

Technology, USA), and the total protein concentration was 

quantified using pierce BCA protein assay kits (23225; 

Thermo Fisher, USA). The protein amount in lysed sEVs was 

estimated based on a calibr ation curve plotted by albumin 

(BSA) standards. Next, 12 μg of proteins from sEV lysates 

were denatured and loaded on sodium dodecyl -sulfate pol-

yacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS -PAGE). The separated 

proteins were subsequently transferred onto a nitrocel lu-

lose membrane (1662807; Bio -Rad, USA) and blotted over-

night with primary antibodies purchased from Santa Cruz 

Biotechnology, USA: anti -CD9 antibody (C -4), anti -CD63 an-

tibody (MX -49.129.5), anti -CD47 antibody (B -11), anti -ALIX 

antibody, anti -TSG101 antibo dy (W27), The secondary an-

tibodies (anti -mouse HRP -linked antibody, 7076; Cell Sig-

naling Technology, USA) were then treated for blotting and 

the HRP on the immunoblots was detected by Clarity Max 

Western Enhanced Chemiluminescence (ECL) substrate 

(1705060; Bio -Rad, USA) using a ChemiDoc XRS+ system 

(Bio -Rad, USA).  

> 2.17. Transmission electron microscopy of sEVs

The sEV solutions were negatively stained and imaged 

through transmission electron microscopy (TEM) using the 

Talios F200i (S)TEM (ThermoFisher, MA) at an 80 kV accel-

erating voltage. The TEM samples were prepared by adding 

3 μL of 1 × 10^9 particles per mL sEV solution to an ul-

trathin carbon film copper grid and incubating at room tem-

perature for 2 min. The solution was then aspirated using 

filter paper and washed with 3 μL filtered distilled water for 

10 s. After aspirating the distilled water, 3 μL of Ura nyless 

negative staining solution (22409; Electron Microscopy Sci-

ence, PA) was added to the sample grid (CF200 -CU -25; Elec-

tron Microscopy Science, PA) and incubated for 1 min. The 

Uranyless solution was aspirated, and the grid was left to 

dry for 2 minutes before imaging. The sEV particle diameter 

was measured using the default distance measurement tool 

in ImageJ.  

> 2.18. RNA sequencing and analysis

RNA was isolated from both RAW264.7 cells and sEVs using 

the Qiagen miRNeasy Tissue/Cells Advanced Kit using the 

manufacturer’s protocol. Buffer AL was added to a pellet of 

cells or 700 ul sEV solution at 10 10 sEV/ml and incubated at 

room temperature for 3 minutes followed by transferring 

the lysate to a gDNA eliminator spin column and centrifuged 

for 30 seconds at 8000 x g. The flow through was saved and 

1.3X volume of isopropanol was added. The mixture was 

tr ansferred to a RNeasy UCP MinElute spin column and cen-

trifuged for 15 s at 8000 g, discarding the flowthrough. 

Buffer RWT was added and centrifuged through, discarding 

the flowthrough. Buffer RPE was added and centrifuged 

through, discarding the flowthrough. 80% ethanol was 

added and centrifuged, disca rding the flowthrough. RNase -

free water was added directly to the center of the spin col-

umn membrane and incubated for 1 minute before centri-

fuging for 1 minute at 12000 g. The RNA solution was tested 

for purity using a nanodrop absorbance spectrometer be-

fore RNA sequencing. RNA sequencing was performed 

through a third -party company (HaploX, Hong Kong). Gene 

quantification was performed using HTSeq, and differential 

sequencing was conducted between each sample using 

DESeq2. Functional enrichment analysis wa s performed us-

ing the Enrichr software tool. [47 –49]  

> 2.19. MS -based proteomics of sEVs

sEVs were lysed in 1X RIPA buffer. A total of 100 ug of pro-

tein from exosomes were trypsinized and eluted using an S -

Trap ™ Micro Spin Column. The eluted protein was then 

dried down and resuspended in a mobile phase buffer. The 

suspension was loaded into an ultrahigh -resolution mass 

spectrometer coupled to a nano -ultrahigh -pressure liquid 

chromatography for bottom -up proteomic s.  

> 2.20. sEV efficacy test on breast cancer cells

A CCK -8 assay used to short term viability of sEVs from dif-

ferent music genres were tested on MCF -7 cells purchased 

from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). MCF -7

cells were seeded into a transparent 96 -well plate at a con-

centration of 1E4 cells/w ell. After 24 hours, sEVs were 

added and transfected for 48 hours at 37C. 10% CCK -8 rea-

gent was added, and the cells were incubated for 4 hours at 

37C. Cell viability was measured by absorbance at 460 nm 

and was normalized to the control group without sEVs . For 

long -term effects, a clonogenic assay was conducted. MCF -7

cells were seeded into transparent 6 -well plates at a seeding 

density of 4E4 cell/well. After 24 hours, sEVs were added 

and transfected for 48 hours at 37C. Cell were then washed, 

trypsinized , and reseeded into 6 well plates at 500 cells/ 

well. Medium was replaced every 48 hours. After 1 week, 

the medium was aspirated and the cells were washed with 

PBS three times. Colonies were fixed with 6% glutaralde-

hyde for 5 minutes at room temperature and stained with 

> preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function 

Johnston et al. 20 26 (preprint) 7

Figure 2 - Characterization of the Piezoelectric substrate (PES) and evaluation of sEV production . A. Photographic 

representation of the PES mat. Scale bar is 1 cm B. Scanning electron micrograph of the microstructure of the PES mat. 

(inset) The average fiber diameter of the fiber -mat used in future experiments are 225 +/ -51 nm. Scale bar is 5 μm. C. 

Graphical representation of the piezoelectric effect converting acoustic mechanical forces to electrical output for piezoe-

lectric stimulation. D. The relationship of acoustic parameters in wave frequency and amplitude on the piezo -responsive 

behavior of the fiber -mat. Overall, the frequency is inversely related to the peak -to -peak output ( E), and the amplitude is 

directly proportional to the peak -to -peak output ( F). G-J. Production calculations and characterization of the RAW264.7 

derived sEVs from various culturing conditions including standard monolayer 2D culture (2D Cntr), PES platform without 

acoustic stimulation (PES OFF), and the PES platform with acoustic stimula tion. G. Size distribution and concentration 

calculations of sEVs derived from each condition using nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA). H. Production rate calcula-

tion measured through concentration with NTA, and normalized by the culturing time, and cell count through manual cell 

counting. Units of production rate are EV/cell/day. I. Zeta potential measurements of sEVs derived from each condition 

using DLS. J. Validation of the production of sEVs through sEV -derived protein marker characterization using western 

blot. K-M. Relationship between amplitude of acoustic input on K. size distribution, L sEV production rate, and M. zeta 

potential. N-P. Relationship between Frequency of acoustic input on N. size distribution, O sEV production rate, and P

zeta poten tial. Q. Linear correlation between sEV production and the piezoelectric output. R. Inverse correlation between 

zeta potential and the piezoelectric output. 

preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function    

> Johnston et al. 20 26(preprint) 8

0.5% (W/V) crystal violet for 15 minutes at room tempera-

ture. Each well was photographed, and colony numbers 

were quantified using ImageJ. The relative colony formation 

(%) was normalized by the control group without sEVs.  

> 2.21. Testing efficacy of sEVs on the cell proliferation of
> MCF7 cells

MCF7 cells were seeded into a transparent 96 well plate and 

incubated at different set time periods (0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 

11, 13 days). Media supplemented with sEVs at 1E9 EV/well 

was replaced every day, and confluency was monitored. The 

media was aspira ted, and the scaffolds were washed with 

PBS thrice before the addition of 10% CCK -8 reagent in cell 

culture media and incubation for 4 h at 37 °C and 5% CO2. 

The cell count was then measured through absorbance at 

460 nm wavelength.         

> 2.22. Testing the effect of sEVs on MCF7 migration
> (scratch assay)

MCF7 cells were incubated with sEVs for 48 hours on a 6 

well plate. Sterilized 20 ul pipet tips were used to make 

scratches. The scratched gaps were monitored at 0, 12, and 

24 hours after the scratch under a light optical microscope. 

The closure of the gaps was quantified using ImageJ. The 

relatively scratched area was normalized to the control 

group.  

> 2.23. Statistical analysis

The data presented in this paper are expressed as the mean 

± the standard deviation (S.D.) or the standard error of rep-

licate measurements (S.E.M.) and analyzed using one way 

ANOVA test using GraphPad Prism 9 software, where appli-

cable. 

3.  Results  

> 3.1. Design of PES, and acoustic -based optimization of sEV
> production .

We successfully synthesized the PES, ( Fig. 2A -B, and Fig. 

S1 ) exhibiting robust piezoelectric transduction, converting 

acoustic -driven mechanical stress into a measurable elec-

trical output in PBS ( Fig. 2C ). The piezoelectric output of 

PES can be tuned by adjusting amplitude and frequency of 

the acoustic input ( Fig. 2D ). The amplitude of the acoustic 

input was directly proportional to the peak -to -peak output, 

plateauing at 191.7 ± 14.6 mV ( Fig. 2E ). In contrast, the fre-

quency of the input was inversely proportional to the piezo-

electric output, with a maximum voltage of 311.5 +/ - 15.5 

mV ( Fig. 2F ). Varying the waveform shape of the acoustic 

input can alter the shape of the electric output, while pos-

sessing similar correlations between frequency and ampli-

tude and electric output as the basic sine wave input ( Fig. 

S2 ). As a control, the piezoelectric activity of PES can be re-

duced by up to ~90% through post -synthesis thermal treat-

ment, providing an equivalent substrate for mechanistic 

studies ( Fig. S3 ). To improve cell adhesion and biocompat-

ibility of the PES, we coated chitosan on the material, result-

ing in a 91.2 ± 10.8% viability of RAW264.7 ( Fig. S4 ). The 

piezo response of the chitosan coated PES remains within a 

suitable range to stimulate the cell membrane and gener-

ated a similar pattern to pristine PES for further studies. 

We measured and compared the sEV production rate of 

RAW264.7 cells in traditional 2D culture, PES without stim-

ulation (PES OFF), and PES with acoustic stimuli (PES ON) 

under 100 Hz, and 80 dB acoustic waves ( Fig.2G -H, and Fig. 

S5 ). PES ON group successfully produced sEVs 6.7 -fold 

faster than 2D culture control, and 4.1 -fold faster than PES 

OFF group, indicating that the PES stimulated by acoustics 

promoted sEV secretion. To note, deactivated PES with a 

stimulation reduced to 19.44 ± 1.99 mV led to a minimal in-

crease in production rate (1.6 -fold) compared to 2D culture, 

thus the change was solely due to the piezo effect rather 

than acoustics. PES ON derived sEVs showed the highest 

charges compared to the other sEVs ( Fig. 2I ), which indi-

cated good dispersity in physiological solutions. Positive 

western blot signals for sEV surface markers (CD9, CD63, 

CD47), and cargo (ALIX, TSG101) confirmed the abundant 

existence of sEVs in all groups ( Fig. 2J and Fig.S6 ). Lastly, 

transmission electron microscopy (TEM) imaging of all 

samples ( Fig.S7 ) showed round morphology with similar 

size distributions to nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) 

data ( Fig.2G ). We also successfully tuned the sEV produc-

tion rate through adjusting the acoustic parameters on the 

same PES material. We observed a linear increase in sEV 

production rate when increasing the amplitude of stimuli, 

whereas the acoustic frequency had an in verse relationship 

with sEV production rate ( Fig. 2K -P). Interestingly, this 

trend was observed universally when we adjusted the 

waveform of the stimuli ( Fig. S8 ). When comparing sEV 

production rate with piezoelectric output, we saw a linearly 

positive tre nd with sEV production rate, suggesting the pie-

zoelectric output was a driving force in sEV production ( Fig. 

2Q ). This was supported by observing a linear decrease in 

sEV production when stimulated with gradually heat deac-

tivated PES material under the same acoustic stimuli 

(Fig.S3 ). Interestingly, when comparing zeta potential with 

piezoelectric effect, we observed an inverse relationship 

(Fig. 2R ). Overall, stimulated PES promoted sEV production 

from RAW264.7 cells by as high as 15.5 -fold (50 Hz, 80 dB 

st imuli) compared to monolayer 2D culture systems and 

this sEV production can be tuned through controlling acous-

tic parameters and thus piezoelectric stimuli. 

> preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function 

Johnston et al. 20 26 (preprint) 9

Figure 3 – Music -inspired control of sEV production and macrophage phenot ype A Schematic representation of the acoustic 

characterization process starting with an audio input, and obtaining the time -based waveform, the fast Fourier transform frequency -

based information, and a radar plot characterization the (top) total acoustic power at frequencies below 200 Hz, (left) Frequency density 

at frequencies lower than 200 Hz, (bottom) Overall power at frequencies above 200 Hz, and (right) frequency density at freque ncies 

above 200 Hz. Acoustic characterization was performed for 3 musical sa mples. (i) An electronic music sample containing powerful low 

frequency waves, and high density at <100 Hz frequencies, resulting in a radar plot at the top -left position. (ii) A rock music sample 

containing a balance both power and density in low and high frequencies resulting in a radar plot at the center. (iii) A classical music 

sample containing a powerful high frequency wave, and high density in >200 Hz frequencies, resulting in a radar plot at the b ottom -right 

position. B-F. Testing the effects of the acoustic stimuli input on the sEV production and macrophage phenotype of RAW264.7 cells 

through sEV production calculation, cytokine release measurements, and Cell marker characterization. B. A flow chart representation 

of the characterization process to observe the immune response and sEV production output based on a given music input. C-D. sEV 

production measurements of the 3 musical stimuli. E. Surface marker characterization of CD86 (M1 polarization) and CD206 (M2 polar-

ization). Negative controls and t he positive control samples were measured to compare the signal with the musical stimuli. F. Measure-

ment of cytokine concentration released into the cell culture supernatant of the control groups, and the various musical stim uli groups. 

Cytokine concentrations were measured using ELISA (N=5, mean ± s.d). 

preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function     

> Johnston et al. 20 26(preprint) 10
> 3.2. Music -inspired control of sEV production and cell pro-
> gramming

We used music assemblies spanning common listening gen-

res (e.g. EDM, classical, rock) as standardized audible acous-

tic waves to investigate how musically distinct stimuli influ-

ence sEV production and macrophage phenotypes. The mu-

sic assembles chosen for ea ch genre were (1) On the floor 

ultrafunk by KPHK to represent EDM, (2) Don’t Go Breaking 

My Heart by Elton John and Kiki Dee to represent rock, and 

Bach’s Suite in B minor , BWV1067: V. Polonaise by Johann 

Sebastian to represent classical music. To understa nd how 

the acoustic features differentially engage piezoelectric 

substrates and cellular responses, we extracted each track’s 

waveform, time -resolved spectral content, bulk frequency 

distribution, and acoustic dissonance ( Fig. 3A ). These three 

music assemblies possessed significant differences in sound 

pressure (power), spectral composition (frequency), and 

harmonic dissonance. First, the EDM assembly possessed 

strong energy concentrated in bass and sub -bass bands (20 -

200 Hz) at h igh sound pressures. In addition to the powerful 

sub bass frequencies, EDM displayed near -maximal normal-

ized dissonance (0.98 ± 0.05) (see Methods ), resulting in 

considerable amplitude instability, previously reported to 

promote systemic proinflammatory re sponses under short 

term exposures ( Fig. 3A.i ). [28 –30] In contrast, the classical 

assembly was characterized by powerful signals at high fre-

quencies, outside the primary piezoelectric activation range 

of the PES. Classical music also exhibited minimal disso-

nance (0.02 ± 0.01), describing a stable, harmonious con-

struction of frequencies, previously reported to promote 

systemic anti -inflammation outcome ( Fig. 3A.ii ). [20,21] 

The rock assembly fell between these extremes, with 

broader spectral balance and intermediate dissonance 

(0.51 ± 0.05) ( Fig. 3A.iii ). When comparing bulk frequency 

information with dissonance calculations, we observed a 

consistent trend: high signal density occurring at sub -bass 

frequencies was a driving force in promoting acoustic dis-

sonance. To test whether this relationship general izes be-

yond music, we performed parallel analyses using canonical 

waveforms (triangle, square, and sawtooth). As expected, 

waveforms with higher harmonic density exhibited higher 

dissonance, with sawtooth > square > triangle ( Fig. S9 -11 ). 

To understand how music -driven activation of the PES in-

fluences sEV biogenesis and macrophage polarization, 

RAW264.7 cells were cultured on PES and applied defined 

acoustic stimuli (waveforms and music assemblies) and 

then quantified functional outputs at the vesicle and cellular 

levels. Specifically, we measured (i) sEV production rate, (ii) 

polarization -associated cytokine release (IL -6 and IL -10), 

and (iii) macrophage surface marker expression (CD86 and 

CD206) ( Fig. 3B -D). As a result, all music stimuli promoted 

sEV production compared to 2D culture system ( Fig. 3E ). 

EDM promoted the highest sEV production enhancement 

(991.5 ± 21.4 EV/cell/day) followed by Rock (502.7 ± 6.7 

EV/cell/day) and classical (429.4 ± 7.9 EV/cell/day) ( Fig. 

3B -D). Interestingly, the power at low frequencies (<200 

Hz) followed the sEV production trend (EDM > rock > clas-

sical) ( Fig. 3A). EDM’s stronger power at low frequencies 

increased piezoelectric stimulation, inducing greater sEV 

production. [13] When we assessed macrophage polariza-

tion under music stimuli, highly dissonant EDM stimuli 

(Dissonance = 0.98 ± 0.05) induced a significant increase in 

CD86 expression and IL6 cytokine release, suggesting M1 

polarization of macrophages ( Fig. 3E -F). In contrast, highly 

consonant classical music stimuli (dissonant = 0.02 ± 0.01) 

promotes CD206 expression and IL10 cytokine release, sug-

gesting M2 polarization ( Fig. 3E -F). Lastly, we observed no 

significant change in surface markers or cytokine release 

under a balanced dissonant rock stimulus (dissonance = 

0.51 ± 0.05) ( Fig. 3E -F). To support this correlation be-

tween dissonance and polarization, we compared different 

levels of dissonant waveforms (sawtooth > square > trian-

gle) as controls and found highly dissonant sawtooth (0.86 

± 0.12), and square waves (0.74 ± 0.22) promoted M1 po-

larization, while low dissonant triangle waves (0.24 ± 0.19) 

promoted M2 polarization ( Fig. S12 -15 ). We confirmed the 

morphological stability and size distribution of sEVs from 

all g roups through TEM and NTA ( Fig. S16 -17 ). Overall, 

these results showed that macrophage polarization can be 

controlled by tuning the dissonance of the acoustic stimuli, 

highlighting how musically distinct inputs, and the piezoe-

lectric simulation they elicit, can program macrophage 

state.         

> 3.3. Cargo analysis and In Vitro application of repro-
> grammed sEVs

We next performed RNA sequencing and proteomics profil-

ing to validate music -driven cell phenotype shifts and deter-

mine whether they were reflected in sEVs. Across all condi-

tions, the global RNA signatures of sEVs broadly tracked 

those of their parental cel ls, consistent with phenotype -de-

pendent vesicle biogenesis. Differential expression analysis 

revealed robust, stimulus -specific divergence across music 

conditions ( Fig. 4A ). Pathway enrichment analysis further 

highlighted distinct biological programs. In E DM -stimulated 

cells, adaptive immune processes and inflammatory path-

ways were significantly upregulated, whereas gene sets as-

sociated with cell cycle progression, cell division, and pro-

liferation were downregulated. In contrast, classical stimu-

lation produ ced the opposite trend, with enrichment of pro-

liferation -associated pathways and suppression of inflam-

mation signaling. Rock -stimulated cells possessed similar 

expressions to the 2D control, exhibiting modest changes 

across these pathways ( Fig. 4B and Fig. S18 ). 

> preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function 

Johnston et al. 20 26 (preprint) 11 

Figure 4 – Cellular and sEV RNA and function vary with music stimuli. A. Differential sequencing between EDM, Rock, and Classical 

music stimuli compared to the 2D controlled condition. B. Clustered heatmap quantifying expression correlated to inflammation (top) and 

cell growth (bottom) C. Relative expression of CACNA1 family RNA responsible for voltage -gated calcium channel protein expression. 

D-F characterization of anti -cancer properties of music derived sEVs when incubated with MCF7 cells D. measurements of the natural 

sEV toxicity to MCF7 cells using a Live/Dead assay. Sc ale bar is 50um. E. calculated cell viability from the live/dead assay. (N=3, mean 

± s.d.) F. calculated cell density G-H characterization of regenerative properties of music derived sEVs when incubated with hFOB1.19 

cells. G. Scratch assay with 1000 EVs/cell dosage of sEV. H. Quantitative measurements of the scratch area (N=5, mean ± s.d). I. long -

term proliferation study characterizing sEVs effect on MCF7 cell proliferation. (N=3, mean ± s.d) One -way ANOVA with Tukey’s post -

test. Ns: not significant; *p>0 .05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001; ****p<0.0001. 

preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function    

> Johnston et al. 20 26(preprint) 12

Under all music conditions, the expression of CACNA (volt-

age -gated Ca² ⁺ channel) gene family were upregulated rela-

tive to the 2D controls, and positively correlated with sEV 

production rate, suggesting Ca² ⁺ influx as a driver of en-

hanced vesicle release ( Fig. 4C ). We next profiled sEV pro-

teomic cargos and surface markers across music -stimulated 

conditions and benchmarked them against 2D culture and 

PES OFF controls ( Fig. S19 ). All groups exhibited sEV sur-

face markers (CD63, CD9, CD47) and cargos (ALIX, 

TSG101). Consi stent with the observed cellular polariza-

tion, EDM -sEVs possessed M1 cargos in the form of proin-

flammatory cytokines (IL6, IL7, IL16), immune activation 

markers (CD86, CD84, CD27, etc.), and tumor growth -inhib-

itor proteins (SCAI, MIIP). In contrast, classi cal -sEVs pos-

sessed M2 cargos in the form of anti -inflammatory markers 

(CD206), matrix metalloproteinases (MMP3, MMP13) and 

collagen subunits (COL27A1, COL18A1, COL11A2) for bone 

and cartilage regeneration. To further investigate the po-

tential therapeutic i mplications, we investigated the intrin-

sic therapeutic effects of EDM -sEVs and classical -sEVs in 

vitro . Interestingly, EDM -sEVs promoted cytotoxicity in 

breast cancer cells compared to the 2D -control -sEVs, with a

decrease in cell density ( Fig. 4D -F). We also observed inhi-

bition of cell proliferation and thus insignificant gap closure 

from breast cancer cells incubated with EDM -sEVs, further 

supporting their anti -cancer potential ( Fig. 4G -I). In con-

trast, classical -sEV promoted cell growth as observed in the 

enhanced cell density compared to 2D -control -sEVs ( Fig. 

4D -F), while accelerating gap closure, and long -term prolif-

eration, demonstrating regeneration potentials ( Fig. 4G -I, 

and Fig. S20 ).  

> 3.4. Engineering regenerative stimuli for enhanced produc-
> tion of anti -inflammatory sEVs

To integrate the high yield sEV production elicited by EDM 

with the pro -regenerative bioactivity associated with the 

classical stimuli, we designed a composite music assembly 

(“Engineered Regeneration”) that combined the key acous-

tic elements underlying ea ch effect. The assembly incorpo-

rated (i) a sub -frequency bass within the resonance fre-

quency of PES to promote sEV production, (ii) a piano chord 

progression that promotes M2 polarization suitable for re-

generation applications, and (iii) water sound as a n egative 

control that does not affect the cells. Piano was chosen after 

screening 13 instrument samples, where it most consist-

ently promoted M2 polarization due to its low dissonance 

timbre ( Fig. S21 -24 ). Acoustic analysis confirmed that the 

Engineered Regeneration music assembly combined high 

power within the PES -optimal frequency window, driven by 

the bass component (peak -to -peak voltage = 211.12 ± 18.44 

mV), with a harmonically stable, low -dissonance musical 

structure provided by the piano chords ( Fig. 5A, and Fig. 

S25 ). We then deconvoluted the contributions of each 

module by stimulating RAW264.7 cells with the individual 

components and defined combinations, and quantifying 

both vesicle output and pol arization markers. Stimuli that 

contain the bass component ( Fig. 5 B -D: 1, 4, 6, 7) promote 

sEV production up to 8.2 -fold higher than 2D culture, indi-

cating sub -bass –driven piezoelectric activation as the dom-

inant determinant of vesicle yield ( Fig. 5B and Fig. S26 ). In 

parallel, stimuli containing the piano component ( Fig. 5 B -

D: 2, 4, 5, 7) promoted M2 polarization characterized by 

CD206 expression and IL10 release, identifying that the 

consonant piano progression is sufficient to promote an 

M2 -like progra m under these conditions (Fig. 5C -D). Across 

all engineered conditions, sEVs maintained round morphol-

ogy and comparable size distribution ( Fig. S27 -28 ), sup-

porting that the stimulus primarily reprogrammed output 

and bioactivity rather than gross vesicle structure. Finally, 

we evaluated the functional consequence of the engineered 

regimen in a regenerative context. Engineered -Regenera-

tion -sEVs increased hFOB1.19 osteoblast cell density, ~3 -

fold enhancements relative to 3D control sEVs and acceler-

ated scratch closure ~2 -fold faster, achieving 100% closure 

within 24 hours ( Fig. 5E -G). These results demonstrated a 

rational, modular approach to “composing” acoustic –piezo-

electric stimuli that jointly maximize sEV manufacturing 

and program therapeutic function, highlighting the PES 

platform as a tunable route to application -specific, phe no-

type -imprinted vesicle therapies. 

4.  Discussion 

In this study, we leveraged our PES platform to connect au-

dible acoustic inputs to bioelectrical cell stimulation and 

thereby control three coupled outputs: (1) sEV production 

rate, (2) macrophage phenotype and the resulting sEV 

cargo, and (3) the intrinsi c therapeutic activity of the pro-

duced sEVs in vitro . Building on these, we further demon-

strated a rational “compositional” strategy, an engineered 

music stimulus, that simultaneously maximizes vesicle yield 

and tunes vesicle function toward tissue regeneration, 

providing a tunable route to fast, controlled production of 

phenotype -imprinted sEVs. 

A key mechanistic question is what drives the increase in 

sEV output under PES stimulation. Prior approaches typi-

cally enhance vesicle production using either high -voltage 

electrical stimulation to trigger Ca² ⁺ influx or high -fre-

quency mechanical stimulation (e.g., surface acoustic 

waves) to engage mechanotransduction [15,31 –33] . In our 

platform, acoustic excitation generates both mechanical vi-

bration and piezoelectric charge; however, two observa-

tions point to piezoelectricity as the dominant contributor. 

First, thermal deactivation of PES piezoelectricity produced 

a proportiona l, linear reduction in sEV production rate, im-

plicating the electrical transduction pathway as necessary 

> preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function 

Johnston et al. 20 26 (preprint) 13 

for the yield gains ( Fig. S3 ). Second, the low -frequency re-

gime that most strongly boosted production (<200 Hz) is 

unlikely to deliver the MHz –GHz mechanical cues typically 

required to enhance vesicle release through purely mechan-

ical pathways [33] . Thus, PES enables a sound -to -electric 

route for scalable sEV production in an easily programma-

ble frequency band. Importantly, this platform adds a capa-

bility largely absent from existing stimulation -based manu-

facturing: by shaping the acoustic “timbre” (including har-

monic structure/dissonance), we can tune macrophage 

polarization and thereby tune the functional subtype of 

macrophage -derived sEVs illustrated by the engineered re-

generative stimulus ( Fig. 5 ). 

Multi -omic profiling further indicates that music -depend-

ent shifts in cell state are imprinted onto vesicle composi-

tion. EDM stimulation produced a proinflammatory, im-

mune -activation –enriched cellular program, supported by 

sEV cargo enriched for inflammat ory cytokines and activa-

tion markers, [34 –36] together with proteins linked to sup-

pression of tumor growth and invasion (e.g., SCAI, MIIP). 

Figure 5 – Characterization of custom music optimized for promoting sEV production and M2 polarization for regeneration 

potentials. A. acoustic characterization of the regeneration music. B. A component analysis showing the impact of each acoustic com-

ponent on piezoresponsive behavior (solid) and sEV production rate (striped), (N=5, mean ± s.d.) C. FACS characterization of CD86 

and CD206 markers of each component. D. IL6 and IL10 cytokine measurements through ELISA assays (N=5, mean). (E -G) Charac-

terization of tissue regeneration potential of regeneration music derived sEVs on hFOB1.19 cells. E. Scratch assay with a range of the 

sEV dosag es. F. Quantification of the scratch area with respect to time (N=3, mean ± s.d.) G. Cell density measurements of hFOB1.19 

after incubation of regeneration music derived sEVs. (N=3, mean ± s.d.) Quantitative measurements of the scratch area (N=5, m ean ± 

s.d). One -way ANOVA with Tukey’s post -test. Ns: not significant; *p>0.05; **p<0.01; ** *p<0.001; ****p<0.0001.     

> preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function
> Johnston et al. 20 26(preprint) 14

[37 –40] These signatures align with the observed anti -pro-

liferative and anti -migratory activity of EDM -sEVs in vitro .

In contrast, classical stimulation drives cells towards prolif-

eration -associated programs while dampening inflamma-

tory pathways; correspondingly, classical -sEVs promoted 

proliferation and migration and were enriched for ECM re-

modeling and osteochondral -associated proteins (including 

MMPs and collagen subunits), consistent with regenerative 

function. [41 –44] Overall, these data support a model in 

which fundamental acoustic structure, transduced through 

PES, acts upstream of macrophage polarization, which then 

determines sEV bioactivity. 

This work also has practical implications for sEV biomanu-

facturing. The ability to independently and modularly con-

trol yield and function suggest a generalizable framework 

for designing acoustic –piezoelectric regimens matched to 

therapeutic intent without genetic engineering or extensive 

biochemical conditioning. Meanwhile, several limitations 

remain. Although production is accelerated, the down-

stream workflow remains similar to standard adherent cul-

ture and would benefit from integration with automated, 

cl osed -loop collection and purification to reduce labor and 

improve throughput. In addition, the current implementa-

tion favors adherent cells; extending these concepts to sus-

pension systems will be important to broaden compatibility 

to other clinically relev ant producers. Addressing these en-

gineering constraints should further position music -guided 

acoustic –piezoelectric stimulation as a scalable and pro-

grammable route to therapeutic sEVs. 

5.  Conclusion 

Our work establishes a programmable, noninvasive strat-

egy to jointly control sEV yield and function through pre-

cisely defined acoustic “music assemblies.” By tuning fre-

quency and amplitude, we significantly increased sEV pro-

duction while simultaneously dir ecting sEV bioactivities. 

Importantly, music assemblies revealed a mechanistic link 

between waveform characteristics and macrophage fate: 

dissonant, powerful low -frequency stimuli biased 

RAW264.7 cells toward an M1 -like inflammatory state, 

whereas consonan t higher -frequency stimuli promoted M2 -

like polarization and a regenerative milieu. These polariza-

tion shifts were reflected in sEV cargos, generating vesicles 

with distinct, cell -mimetic bioactivities. Leveraging this in-

sight, we engineered a custom stimu lus that maximized 

both sEV output and M2 polarization, producing vesicles 

that enhanced osteoblast growth. Together, these findings 

position PES as a tunable, universal piezoresponsive plat-

form that bridges acoustic -based interventions with sEV en-

gineerin g, enabling scalable, cargo -tailored, and applica-

tion -ready sEV therapeutics. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

James Johnston: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investi-

gation, Formal Analysis, Visualization, Writing – Original 

Draft . Erin Boyce: Conceptualization, Methodology . Tiago 

Thomaz Migliati Zanon: Investigation Hyunsu Jeon: Visu-

alization Courtney Khong: Investigation Yun Young Choi: 

Investigation Nosang Vincent Myung: Methodology Mar-

tin Nunez: Investigation Mae -Lin Pinkstaff: Investigation 

Yichun Wang: Conceptualization, Funding Acquisition, Su-

pervision, Writing – Original Draft. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

James Johnston, and Yichun Wang are named inventors on 

a granted patent on the use of the piezoelectric nanofibrous 

scaffolds (WO2025207495A1) owned by the University of 

Notre Dame. The other authors declare that they have no 

competing interests. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Institute of Health 

(R35GM150608, and R21CA277663 -01A1) and the Depart-

ment of Education (P200A210048). We acknowledge the 

Analytical Science and Engineering Core Facility (ASEND) 

and Dr. Karl Cronberger for their tec hnical assistance in PES 

fabrication and characterization. We acknowledge the Har-

per Cancer Research Institute Tissue Bank Facility (HCRI 

tissue -bank) and Dr. Emily Cronberger for their technical 

assistance with sEV particle analysis and Flow cytometry. 

We acknowledge the Notre Dame Integrated Imaging Facil-

ity and Dr. Sara Cole, and Dr. Maksym Zhukovskyi for their 

technical assistance with TEM, and the confocal microscopy. 

We acknowledge the Notre Dame Mass Spectrometry & Pro-

teomics Facility, along with Dr. Bill Boggess, for their tech-

nical assistance with sEV proteomics. We acknowledge 

HaploX for their technical assistance with RNA -sequencing 

and analysis. We thank Gaeun Kim, Tiger Shi, Dr. Yichen Liu, 

Dr. Wei Zhang, Farbod Shirinichi, and Yao Huo for their 

technical and conceptual guidance. 

Data Availability Statement 

The data that support the findings of this study are available 

from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 

References 

[1] R. Kalluri, V.S. LeBleu, The biology, function, and bi-

omedical applications of exosomes, Science 367 (2020) 

eaau6977. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau6977. 

[2] O.P.B. Wiklander, M.Á. Brennan, J. Lötvall, X.O. 

Breakefield, S. EL Andaloussi, Advances in therapeutic ap-

plications of extracellular vesicles, Science Translational 

Medicine 11 (2019) eaav8521. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aav8521.     

> preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function
> Johnston et al. 20 26(preprint) 15

[3] A. Möller, R.J. Lobb, The evolving translational po-

tential of small extracellular vesicles in cancer, Nat Rev Can-

cer 20 (2020) 697 –709. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41568 -

020 -00299 -w. 

[4] E.I. Buzas, The roles of extracellular vesicles in the 

immune system, Nat Rev Immunol 23 (2023) 236 –250. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41577 -022 -00763 -8. 

[5] J. Malda, J. Boere, C.H.A. van de Lest, P.R. van 

Weeren, M.H.M. Wauben, Extracellular vesicles — new tool 

for joint repair and regeneration, Nat Rev Rheumatol 12 

(2016) 243 –249. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nrrheum.2015.170. 

[6] Y. Wang, M. Zhao, S. Liu, J. Guo, Y. Lu, J. Cheng, J. Liu, 

Macrophage -derived extracellular vesicles: diverse media-

tors of pathology and therapeutics in multiple diseases, Cell 

Death Dis 11 (2020) 924. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419 -

020 -03127 -z. 

[7] R.E. Veerman, G.G. Akpinar, M. Eldh, S. Gabrielsson, 

Immune Cell -Derived Extracellular Vesicles – Functions and 

Therapeutic Applications, Trends in Molecular Medicine 25 

(2019) 382 –394. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2019.02.003. 

[8] J. Johnston, T. Stone, Y. Wang, Biomaterial -enabled 

3D cell culture technologies for extracellular vesicle manu-

facturing, Biomater. Sci. (2023) 10.1039.D3BM00469D. 

https://doi.org/10.1039/D3BM00469D. 

[9] Y. Zhang, X. Meng, D.W. Greening, Y. Huang, B. Li, Z. 

Li, G. Long, J. Lötvall, L. Lv, I.K.H. Poon, T. Wang, J.X. Law, T. 

Cai, F. Yang, L. Yu, L. Zheng, H. Yin, Unveiling Heterogeneity: 

Innovations and Challenges in Single -Vesicle Analysis for 

Clinical Tra nslation, Journal of Extracellular Vesicles 14 

(2025) e70209. https://doi.org/10.1002/jev2.70209. 

[10] Z. Liu, X. Wan, Z.L. Wang, L. Li, Electroactive Bio-

materials and Systems for Cell Fate Determination and Tis-

sue Regeneration: Design and Applications, Advanced Ma-

terials 33 (2021) 2007429. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202007429. 

[11] X. Wang, S.T. Stefanello, V. Shahin, Y. Qian, From 

Mechanoelectric Conversion to Tissue Regeneration: Trans-

lational Progress in Piezoelectric Materials, Advanced Ma-

terials 37 (2025) 2417564. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202417564. 

[12] J. Johnston, H. Jeon, Y.Y. Choi, G. Kim, T. Shi, C. 

Khong, H. -C. Chang, N.V. Myung, Y. Wang, Stimulative piezo-

electric nanofibrous scaffolds for enhanced small extracel-

lular vesicle production in 3D cultures, Biomater. Sci. 12 

(2024) 5728 –5741. 

https://do i.org/10.1039/D4BM00504J. 

[13] C. Wang, X. Zhao, T. Yan, S. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Chen, W. 

Wu, Z. Qiao, Q. Chen, X. Wang, X. -L. Chen, Q. Zhang, S. Wu, 

High Efficiency Production of Functional Small Extracellular 

Vesicles through Cellular Self -Motivation, Nano Lett. 25 

(2025) 6471 –6480. http s://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nano-

lett.5c00094. 

[14] M. Peng, Q. Zhao, A. Chai, Y. Wang, M. Wang, X. Du, 

A ferroelectric living interface for fine -tuned exosome se-

cretion toward physiology -mimetic neurovascular remod-

eling, Matter 8 (2025). 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.2024.10.019. 

[15] L. Meng, J. Zhang, P. Li, W. Li, J. Shi, Z. Cheng, E. Os-

troff, C. Yang, J. Yue, A. Prominski, S. Kim, J. Chen, B. Tian, 

Scalable bioelectronic production of extracellular vesicles 

for cardiac tissue regeneration, Device 3 (2025) 100968. 

https://doi.org/10 .1016/j.device.2025.100968. 

[16] Y.H. Jung, S.K. Hong, H.S. Wang, J.H. Han, T.X. Pham, 

H. Park, J. Kim, S. Kang, C.D. Yoo, K.J. Lee, Flexible Piezoelec-

tric Acoustic Sensors and Machine Learning for Speech Pro-

cessing, Advanced Materials 32 (2020) 1904020. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.20190 4020. 

[17] Z. Lin, S. Duan, M. Liu, C. Dang, S. Qian, L. Zhang, H. 

Wang, W. Yan, M. Zhu, Insights into Materials, Physics, and 

Applications in Flexible and Wearable Acoustic Sensing 

Technology, Advanced Materials 36 (2024) 2306880. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.20230 6880. 

[18] A. Zhang, T. Zou, D. Guo, Q. Wang, Y. Shen, H. Hu, B. 

Ye, M. Xiang, The Immune System Can Hear Noise, Front. Im-

munol. 11 (2021). 

https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2020.619189. 

[19] A. Abouee -Mehrizi, Y. Rasoulzadeh, T. Kazemi, M. 

Mesgari -Abbasi, Inflammatory and immunological changes 

caused by noise exposure: A systematic review, Journal of 

Environmental Science and Health, Part C 38 (2022) 61 –90. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/26896583.20 20.1715713. 

[20] M. Uchiyama, X. Jin, Q. Zhang, T. Hirai, A. Amano, H. 

Bashuda, M. Niimi, Auditory stimulation of opera music in-

duced prolongation of murine cardiac allograft survival and 

maintained generation of regulatory CD4+CD25+ cells, J 

Cardiothorac Surg 7 (2012) 26 .

https://doi.org/10.1186/1749 -8090 -7-26. 

[21] M. Uchiyama, X. Jin, Q. Zhang, A. Amano, T. 

Watanabe, M. Niimi, Music Exposure Induced Prolongation 

of Cardiac Allograft Survival and Generated Regulatory 

CD4+ Cells in Mice, Transplantation Proceedings 44 (2012) 

1076 –1079. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trans pro-

ceed.2012.02.008.     

> preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function
> Johnston et al. 20 26(preprint) 16

[22] J.O. Alao, K.E.M. Lau, D. White, K. Lee, C. Puli’uvea, J. 

Bartley, Acoustic therapy for allergic rhinitis and chronic 

rhinosinusitis: modulating microbiome, immunity and well -

being, Front. Allergy 6 (2025). 

https://doi.org/10.3389/falgy.2025.1649031. 

[23] T. Münzel, A. Daiber, S. Steven, L.P. Tran, E. 

Ullmann, S. Kossmann, F.P. Schmidt, M. Oelze, N. Xia, H. Li, A. 

Pinto, P. Wild, K. Pies, E.R. Schmidt, S. Rapp, S. Kröller -Schön, 

Effects of noise on vascular function, oxidative stress, and 

inflammation: mec hanistic insight from studies in mice, Eur 

Heart J 38 (2017) 2838 –2849. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehx081. 

[24] M. Alves -Pereira, N.A.A. Castelo Branco, Vi-

broacoustic disease: Biological effects of infrasound and 

low -frequency noise explained by mechanotransduction 

cellular signalling, Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Bi-

ology 93 (2007) 256 –279. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.pbio-

molbio.2006.07.011. 

[25] H. Ahn, E. -M. Jung, M. -W. Cho, M. -G. Shin, J. -Y. Choi, 

G. -S. Lee, Sonic vibration ameliorates inflammatory dis-

eases via the up -regulation of IL -10, Animal Cells and Sys-

tems 28 (2024) 161 –170. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/19768354.2024.2346598. 

[26] X. Wang, Z. Xie, G. Du, Research on the Intervention 

Effect of Vibroacoustic Therapy in the Treatment of Patients 

with Depression, IJMHP 26 (2024) 149 –160. 

https://doi.org/10.32604/ijmhp.2023.030755. 

[27] D. del Rosario -Gilabert, A. Valenzuela -Miralles, G. 

Esquiva, Advances in mechanotransduction and sonobiol-

ogy: effects of audible acoustic waves and low -vibration 

stimulations on mammalian cells, Biophys Rev 16 (2024) 

783 –812. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1255 1-024 -01242 -1. 

[28] C.G. Pascuan, S.L. Uran, M.R. Gonzalez -Murano, M.R. 

Wald, L.R. Guelman, A.M. Genaro, Immune alterations in-

duced by chronic noise exposure: Comparison with re-

straint stress in BALB/c and C57Bl/6 mice, Journal of Im-

munotoxicology 11 (2014) 78 –83. 

https://do i.org/10.3109/1547691X.2013.800171. 

[29] K. -C. Zheng, M. Ariizumi, Modulations of Immune 

Functions and Oxidative Status Induced by Noise Stress, J 

Occup Health 49 (2007) 32 –38. 

https://doi.org/10.1539/joh.49.32. 

[30] V. Rai, M.B. Wood, H. Feng, N.M. Schabla, S. Tu, J. 

Zuo, The immune response after noise damage in the coch-

lea is characterized by a heterogeneous mix of adaptive and 

innate immune cells, Sci Rep 10 (2020) 15167. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -020 -72181 -6.

[31] Z. Yang, J. Shi, J. Xie, Y. Wang, J. Sun, T. Liu, Y. Zhao, 

X. Zhao, X. Wang, Y. Ma, V. Malkoc, C. Chiang, W. Deng, Y. 

Chen, Y. Fu, K.J. Kwak, Y. Fan, C. Kang, C. Yin, J. Rhee, P. Ber-

tani, J. Otero, W. Lu, K. Yun, A.S. Lee, W. Jiang, L. Teng, B.Y.S. 

Kim, L .J. Lee, Large -scale generation of functional mRNA -en-

capsulating exosomes via cellular nanoporation, Nat Bio-

med Eng 4 (2020) 69 –83. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551 -019 -0485 -1. 

[32] T. Fukuta, A. Nishikawa, K. Kogure, Low level elec-

tricity increases the secretion of extracellular vesicles from 

cultured cells, Biochem Biophys Rep 21 (2019) 100713. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrep.2019.100713. 

[33] L.A. Ambattu, S. Ramesan, C. Dekiwadia, E. Hanssen, 

H. Li, L.Y. Yeo, High frequency acoustic cell stimulation pro-

motes exosome generation regulated by a calcium -depend-

ent mechanism, Commun Biol 3 (2020) 1–9. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003 -020 -01277 -6. 

[34] C.A. Dinarello, Proinflammatory Cytokines, Chest 

118 (2000) 503 –508. 

https://doi.org/10.1378/chest.118.2.503. 

[35] C.L. Mackall, T.J. Fry, R.E. Gress, Harnessing the bi-

ology of IL -7 for therapeutic application, Nat Rev Immunol 

11 (2011) 330 –342. https://doi.org/10.1038/nri2970. 

[36] Macrophages: Their Untold Story in T Cell Activa-

tion and Function, in: International Review of Cell and Mo-

lecular Biology, Academic Press, 2019: pp. 73 –93. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.ircmb.2018.07.001. 

[37] Y. Wang, J. Wen, W. Zhang, MIIP, a Cytoskeleton 

Regulator that Blocks Cell Migration and Invasion, Delays 

Mitosis, and Suppresses Tumorogenesis, Current Protein & 

Peptide Science 12 (2011) 68 –73. 

https://doi.org/10.2174/138920311795659434. 

[38] Y. Du, P. Wang, Upregulation of MIIP regulates hu-

man breast cancer proliferation, invasion and migration by 

mediated by IGFBP2, Pathology - Research and Practice 215 

(2019) 152440. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prp.2019.152440. 

[39] D.T. Brandt, C. Baarlink, T.M. Kitzing, E. Kremmer, J. 

Ivaska, P. Nollau, R. Grosse, SCAI acts as a suppressor of can-

cer cell invasion through the transcriptional control of β1 -

integrin, Nat Cell Biol 11 (2009) 557 –568. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1862. 

[40] X. Luo, X. Zhang, J. Peng, Y. Chen, W. Zhao, X. Jiang, 

L. Su, M. Xie, B. Lin, miR -371b -5p promotes cell prolifera-

tion, migration and invasion in non -small cell lung cancer 

via SCAI, Biosci Rep 40 (2020) BSR20200163. 

https://doi.org/10.1042/BSR20200163.     

> preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this this version posted March 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.11.711216 doi: bioRxiv preprint Music -Inspired Acoustic -Piezoelectric Stimulation Ac celerates Extracellular Vesicle Production and Programs Therapeutic Function
> Johnston et al. 20 26(preprint) 17

[41] C. Khoswanto, Role of matrix metalloproteinases in 

bone regeneration: Narrative review, Journal of Oral Biol-

ogy and Craniofacial Research 13 (2023) 539 –543. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobcr.2023.06.002. 

[42] X. Chen, Y. Li, Role of matrix metalloproteinases in 

skeletal muscle: Migration, differentiation, regeneration 

and fibrosis, Cell Adhesion & Migration 3 (2009) 337 –341. 

https://doi.org/10.4161/cam.3.4.9338. 

[43] Biochemical Insights into the Role of Matrix Metal-

loproteinases in Regeneration: Challenges and Recent De-

velopments, Future Medicinal Chemistry (n.d.). 

https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.4155/fmc.09.8 

3 (accessed February 1, 2026). 

[44] K. Chen, M. Xu, F. Lu, Y. He, Development of Matrix 

Metalloproteinases -Mediated Extracellular Matrix Remod-

eling in Regenerative Medicine: A Mini Review, Tissue Eng 

Regen Med 20 (2023) 661 –670. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s13770 -023 -00536 -x. 

[45] G. Ico, A. Showalter, W. Bosze, S.C. Gott, B.S. Kim, 

M.P. Rao, N.V. Myung, J. Nam, Size -dependent piezoelectric 

and mechanical properties of electrospun P(VDF -TrFE) 

nanofibers for enhanced energy harvesting, J. Mater. Chem. 

A 4 (2016) 2293 –2304. 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C5TA10423H. 

[46] W.A. Sethares, Local consonance and the relation-

ship between timbre and scale, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 94 (1993) 

1218 –1228. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.408175. 

[47] E.Y. Chen, C.M. Tan, Y. Kou, Q. Duan, Z. Wang, G.V. 

Meirelles, N.R. Clark, A. Ma’ayan, Enrichr: interactive and 

collaborative HTML5 gene list enrichment analysis tool, 

BMC Bioinformatics 14 (2013) 128. 

https://doi.org/10.1186/1471 -2105 -14 -128. 

[48] M.V. Kuleshov, M.R. Jones, A.D. Rouillard, N.F. Fer-

nandez, Q. Duan, Z. Wang, S. Koplev, S.L. Jenkins, K.M. Jagod-

nik, A. Lachmann, M.G. McDermott, C.D. Monteiro, G.W. 

Gundersen, A. Ma’ayan, Enrichr: a comprehensive gene set 

enrichment analysis web server 2 016 update, Nucleic Acids 

Res 44 (2016) W90 -97. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw377. 

[49] Gene Set Knowledge Discovery with Enrichr - Xie -

2021 - Current Protocols - Wiley Online Library, (n.d.). 

https://currentprotocols.onlineli-

brary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cpz1.90 (accessed January 

31, 2026).