Title: Longitudinal Single-Cell RNA-seq Profiling of Lung Cell Phenotypes, Signaling, and Cross-talk During Fibrosis Resolution

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 51

Markdown Content:
1

Longitudinal Single -Cell RNA -seq Profiling of Lung Cell Phenotypes , Signaling , and Cross -talk During 

Fibrosis Resolution 

Jen nifer Speth 1, Vivian T. Wong 2, Steve D. Guzman 2, Yang Liu 1, Natalie M. Walker 1, Rachel L. Zemans 1,

Timothy S. Blackwell 1, Carlos A. Aguilar 2, Marc Peters -Golden 1, Sean M. Fortier 1

> 1

Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan 

Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 

> 2

Department of Biomedical Engineering , School of Engineering, University of Michigan 

Corresponding Author :

Sean M. Fortier, MD 

6301B MSRB III 

1150 W. Medical Center Dr. 

Ann Arbor, MI 48109 -5642 

Email:  sfortier@med.umich.edu 

Fax: 734 -764 -4556 

Phone: 734 -763 -9065 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

ABSTRACT 

Resolution of fibrosis following lung injury is distinguished from persistent/progressive parenchymal scarring 

through the timely clearance of aberrant cell types, removal of excess collagens, and regeneration of alveolar 

structure. The requisite signaling pathways, cellular cross -talk, and phenotypic shifts associated with, and 

required for, resolution of established lung fibrosis have not been well characterized. To address this critical 

knowledge gap, we performed longitudinal sing le -cell RNA sequencing of whole mouse lung digests obtained 

during spontaneously resolving fibrosis. We observed a putatively pro -fibrotic macrophage population emerg e

during peak fibrosis and undergo partial clear ance during resolution . O ur study also revealed conspicuous 

shifts in well -established pathways associated with tissue repair and fibrosis among immune, mesenchymal, 

and epithelial cells during spontaneous resolution . In addition to a decline in pro -fibrotic driver pathways, the 

putative anti -fibrotic pathways cAMP, HGF/MET, and TWEAK were enriched in several cell types during 

spontaneous resolution. CellChat analysis was used to predict the cellular senders and recipients of each 

pathway and characterize their longitudinal changes. Our characterization of the cellular and molecular 

dynamics in whole lungs during spontaneous fibrosis resolution provides a foundation for the identification of 

endogenous pathways that might be leveraged to treat pulmonary fibrosis. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

INTRODUCTION 

Pulmonary fibrosis (PF) is a pathologic condition in which the lung’s normal wound -healing response goes 

awry . Because available antifibrotic drugs fail to halt or reverse lung scarring , this disease continues to exert 

enormous morbidity and mortality . For decades, PF research has primarily focused on characterizing the 

cellular and molecular basis for lung fibrogenesis , with much less attention to the cellular signaling pathways 

and phenotypic shifts operative in normal repair. As individuals with PF often exhibit substantial parenchymal 

scarring at the time of diagnosis (1) , identification of the se endogenous processes and cellular events 

associated with fibrosis resolution following injury in healthy lungs has the potential to provide novel targets to 

treat and possibly reverse PF. 

Though the specific mechanisms that orchestrate fibrosis resolution are not well understood, it ultimately 

involves the removal of excess collagen/matrix proteins and a return of cellular and molecular homeostasis 

enabling restoration of a normal gas exchange surface (2) . Th is, in turn, depend s upon phenotypic/functional 

alteration or clearance of aberrant specific cell types, namely fibroblasts, epithelial cells, and macrophages. A 

well -known experimental example of spontaneous fibrosis resolution following lung injury is the single -dose 

bleomycin (bleo) model. Following intrapulmonary bleo administration, young healthy mice reliably develop 

fibrosis by day 14 (peaking by day 21) and exhibit near complete resolution by day 63 (3 -6) . Although cell -

specific genetic perturbations have been shown to abolish spontaneous resolution (4, 6 -9) , the cross -talk 

between lung cells, their subtypes, and the operative pathways during resolution remain poorly characterized. 

Single -cell RNA sequencing (scRNA -seq) has provided new and rich insights into the cellular heterogeneity 

among lung cell types in a variety of disease models . Such studies of fibrotic human and mouse lungs have 

revealed mesenchymal, epithelial, and immune cell subtypes that play key roles in the development of 

fibrosis (10 -19) . By contrast , we are not aware of any comprehensive single -cell investigations that have 

simultaneously profiled all lung cells in situ in an unselected manner in order to evaluate dynamic shifts in 

cellular phenotype, key regulatory pathways, and intercellular cross -talk throughout the process of 

spontaneous resolution. A holistic single -cell approach without prior cell enrichment has the potential to 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

pro vide an unbiased assessment to uncover key insights into tissue remodeling, identify pathways associated 

with fibrosis resolution, and reveal potential targets for intervention to promote lung regeneration. 

We performed longitudinal scRNA -seq on whole lung digests from young healthy mice to characterize the 

shifts in cell ular composition, phenotype , and crosstalk during spontaneous fibrosis resolution. Specifically, 

mice were treated with a single dose of intrapulmonary bleo (day 0) and harvested for whole lung digest 

scRNA -seq on days 21, 42, and 63 – time points that we have previously established as representing peak 

fibrosis, ~50% (mid) resolution , and ~95% (full) resolution , respectively (6, 7) . Our study provides the first 

descriptive single -cell transcriptomic analysis of whole lung tissue during spontaneous fibrosis resolution. 

METHODS 

Animal Studies 

Female C57BL/6 mice homozygous for a Cre -inducible Rosa26 tdTomato lineage tag were bred with male 

mice heterozygous for Cre coupled to a tamoxifen inducible (ERT2) Col1a2 promoter. The 

Col1a2 CreERT2+/0 ;R26 tdT+/0 progeny were aged to 12 weeks and treated with o.p. saline or bleo (1.0 U/kg, 

Millipore Sigma, B5507) at day 0 as described previously (9) . Mice were sacrificed on days 21, 42, or 63. 

Lungs were perfused with cold PBS, and the entire lung was harvested to generate RNA lib raries for 

sequencing . Specifically, perfused lungs were minced followed by end over end rotation in a solution of 0.1% 

collagenase A (Roche; cat# 10103578001) in serum free DMEM for 30 min at 37C. Tissue pieces were 

further dissociated using an 18G needle, followed by straining through a 40 m cell strainer to remove debris 

and undigested tissue. Cells were then pelleted by spinning at 500xg for 10 min and resuspended in PBS 

followed by pooling of equal numbers of male and female derived cells for scRNA -seq library preparation. In 

a parallel experiment, the right lower lobe was frozen in liquid nitrogen, embedded in paraf fin, and 

subsequently sectioned to perform Masson’s trichrome staining, followed by imaging with bright -field, and 

whole -slide imaging with a Vectra Polaris Brightfield Scanner. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

scRNA -seq data processing and analysis 

Raw sequencing data were processed using CellRanger (version 7.2.0, 10x Genomics). Sequencing reads 

were aligned to the Mus musculus reference transcriptome (mm10) using the STAR aligner. The CellRanger 

count pipeline was run with default parameters to generate gene expression count matrices. Raw and filtered 

feature barcode matrices were imported into R (version 4.3.1) using the Read10X function. 

All downstream analysis was performed in R using Seurat (version 5.0.0). Four datasets, corresponding to 

distinct experimental time points ( saline control , day 21, day 42, day 63) were preprocessed independently. 

Each dataset consisted of high -quality singlet cells that underwent quality control as described below. 

Ambient RNA contamination was corrected using SoupX (version 1.6.2). A SoupChannel object was created 

from the raw and filtered matrices, and the contamination fraction was estimated from the expression profiles 

of empty droplets. This estimated background was then used to adjust expression counts for individual cells, 

and corrected count matrices were saved for downstream analysis. 

Standard quality control thresholds were applied to remove low -quality cells and potential multiplets 

(Supplemental Figure 1B) . Cells with fewer than 200 detected genes or more than 10,000 genes, fewer than 

500 or more than 20,000 total RNA counts, or greater than 10% of UMIs mapping to mitochondrial genes 

were excluded. Filtered data were normalized using log -normalization, regr essing out total UMI counts and 

the percentage of mitochondrial transcripts per cell. Variable features were identified using the VST method, 

and principal component analysis (PCA) dimensionality reduction was performed. Data were further 

normalized using SCTransform (glmGamPoi method) to stabilize variance across sequencing depth. The first 

30 principal components were used for uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) embedding 

and unsupervised clustering based on a sha red nearest neighbor (SNN) with a resolution of 0.5. 

Doublet detection was performed using DoubletFinder (version 2.0.4). The expected doublet rate was set to 

7.5% based on 10x Genomics guidelines for the estimated cell recovery rate (20) , and default parameters 

were used otherwise. Cells classified as singlets were then extracted for downstream analysis. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

Cell type annotation was conducted with Clustifyr (version 1.8.0). Cluster -level expression profiles were 

correlated to two mouse lung single -cell reference datasets from CZ CellxGene and ScTypeDB (21, 22) .

Gene identifiers were harmonized to Mus musculus gene symbols using biomaRt. Cluster -level correlations 

were computed using clustify and cell type identities were assigned to each cluster. Manual review and 

refinement of annotations was performed as needed. Differential gene expression analysis was cond ucted 

across annotated cell types to identify key marker genes. Subsets of selected cell populations (fibroblasts, 

epithelial cells, and macrophages) were reanalyzed using the same Seurat workflow, with clu stering 

resolution increased to 0.7 to capture finer substructure within lineages. 

Investigation of cell -cell communication networks was performed using CellChat (version 1.6.1) on the 

datasets. Analyses were performed both on the full dataset and on a subset of selected cell types using 

metadata from the Seurat cluster identities from t he SCT assay. The CellChat mouse ligand -receptor 

database (including non -protein interactions) was used to predict signaling interactions, with cell populations 

with fewer than 10 cells excluded from the analysis. Overexpressed genes and ligand -receptor in teractions 

were identified, followed by computation of communication probabilities between cell types and pathway and 

centrality analyses. All CellChat analyses were run with default parameters for functions and visualization. 

Immunofluorescence Microscopy 

Mouse lungs were fixed with 10% formalin, embedded in paraffin, sectioned, and mounted on glass slides. 

Subsequent deparaffinization, citrate antigen retrieval , blocking and staining was performed as previously 

described (7) . Staining of fixed fibroblasts and murine lung tissue was performed with the following primary 

antibodies: rabbit anti -CD63 (1:500; HPA010088; Sigma) and rabbit anti -Arg -1 (1:500; 16001 -1-AP; 

Proteintech) overnight at 4°C. They were then incubated with anti -rabbit secondary antibodies ( FITC (1:2 00 ;

Jackson 711 -545 -152) and Cy5 (1: 200 ; Jackson 107 -605 -142) . Mounting medium containing DAPI 

(Invitrogen) was used to stain nuclei. Images were obtained using a Nikon Eclipse Ti2 Inverted Confocal or 

an Olympus BX53 microscope. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

RESULTS 

scRNA -seq of the mouse lung during spontaneous fibrosis resolution 

Previous scRNA -seq studies during spontaneous PF resolution have employed initial sorting of various 

prespecified lung cell popul ations (19, 23) , To examine these dynamic changes at a n unbiased whole lung 

cell level , we conducted scRNA -seq on unsorted lung digests harvested from mice following a single dose of 

intrapulmonary bleo (1 .0 U/kg ) at day 21 (peak fibrosis), day 42 (partial [~50%] resolution), and day 63 (full 

[~95%] resolution Fig ure 1A). Histopathologic analysis using Masson’s trichrome staining confirmed 

increased collagen deposition and fibrotic changes at day 21 compared to saline control, with 

histopathological evidence of fibrosis decreasing progressively through days 42 and 63 (Fig ure 1B) as has 

been previously reported (3 -7, 24) . We generated 4 high -quality scRNA -Seq libraries encompassing on 

average 2,388 genes and 7,685 unique molecular identifiers per cell (Supplemental Figure 1). After cell 

digestion and sequencing using the Illumina 10X and standard Seurat workflow (Fig ure 1C), we employed 

filtering to reduce the dimensionality of the datasets using Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection 

(UMAP) and Louvain clustering which displayed 20 cell types (Figure 1D). Cell types were annotated using 

established identification markers from two mouse lung single -cell datasets (21, 22) , revealing the presence 

of dendritic cells, T cells, B cells, NK cells, neutrophils, monocytes, interstitial macrophages (IM), alveolar 

macrophages (AM), vascular endothelial cells, lymphatic endothelial cells, aerocytes (aCap endothelial), 

general capill ary (gCap endothelial) cells, alveolar type 2 (AT2) and type 1 (AT1) epithelial cells, club cells, 

ciliated cells, pericytes, smooth muscle (SM) cells, mesothelial cells, and fibroblasts (Fig ure 1D-E). At peak 

fibrosis, we observed modest shifts in certain immune cell populations (T cells, B cells, neutrophils, and IMs) 

compared to baseline ( control ); these changes returned to baseline levels during resolution (days 42 and 63). 

Notably, at whole lung resolution, no substantial changes were detected in the proportions of mesenchymal 

(fibroblasts, pericytes, and SM cells) or epithelial (AT1, AT2, club, and ciliated cells) populations throughout 

disease progression and resolution (Fig ure 1F). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

Lung immune, mesenchymal, and epithelial cells exhibit b idirectional signaling and pathway 

enrichment during fibrosis resolution 

To investigate cell communication dynamics, we employed CellChat analysis (25) to quantify both the relative 

incoming and outgoing signaling strengths for each cell population, as well as the number of interactions 

between different cell types. 

AMs , consistent with their central role in orchestrating lung immune responses, demonstrated high interaction 

strength for both incoming and outgoing signals (Fig ure 2A) . In contrast, other innate immune cells (dendritic 

cells, monocytes, and neutrophils) and adaptive immune cells (T and B cells) displayed substantially lower 

levels of outgoing signaling. Fibroblasts, AT 1 and AT2 epithelial cells, and IMs exhibited moderate levels of 

both incoming and outgoing signal s. We found that both IM and AM populations primarily communicate with 

each other as well as with mesenchymal cell populations (Fig ure 2B) . This pattern is also mirrored in 

fibroblasts, which demonstrate height ened signaling with IMs and AMs, as well as other mesenchymal cell 

populations. 

Focusing on cell types typically considered most relevant to disease pathology and their specific 

communication patterns , w e conducted a detailed analysis of incoming and outgoing signaling pathways 

among AMs, AT1 cells, AT2 cells, and fibroblasts (Fig ure 2C) . Consistent with their role as facilitators of 

fibrosis , fibroblasts received incoming signal s that activate pathways known to be pro -fibrotic including 

osteopontin ( SPP1 ) (26) , fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) (27) , platelet -derived growth factor (PDGF) (28, 29) ,

and transforming growth factor -beta (T GF β) (27) . They also produced outgoing pro -inflammatory signals such 

as migration inhibitory factor ( MIF ), complement , C-X-C motif chemokines (CXCLs ), and oncostatin M (OSM) ,

supporting the idea that fibroblasts can adopt an inflammatory phenotype that may contribute to the fibrotic 

process (30, 31) . AMs also demonstrated increased fibrotic signaling, characterized by the marked strength 

of their outgoing SPP1, TGF β, and PDGF signaling as well as inflammatory C -C motif chemokines (CCL) 

signaling . AT1 alveolar epithelial cells produced various growth factors including FGF , VEGF, and PDGF . AT2 

cells were found to be a source of complement and an additional source of MIF . AT2 cells have been shown 

to promote lung fibrosis through MIF -dependent cross -talk with lung macrophages (32) . Notably, fibroblasts ,

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

AT2 , and to a lesser degree AT1 cells, were all found to be a source of Growth Arrest –Specific (GAS )

signaling with AMs as a likely recipient cell type. Among this family of ligands, GAS6 has been reported to 

exert anti -inflammatory effects in lung macrophages (33) . Interestingly, pathways associated with both “pro -

resolution” and “pro -fibrotic” activity (depending on cell type, context, and the organ invo lv ed) were also 

enhanced ; these includ e TNF -related weak inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK) (34) (fibroblasts) , growth 

differentiation factor (GDF) (35, 36) (fibroblasts and AT1) , and bone morphogenic protein (BMP) (37) 

(fibroblasts and AT1) (Fig ure 2D ). 

Th ough not specifically identified previously in the context of fibrosis resolution, th ese findings are consistent 

with many well -characterized pro - and anti -fibrotic and -inflammatory pathways operative within immune, 

mesenchymal, and epithelial cells during lung fibrogenesis and its spontaneous resolution . Several instances 

of p aired incoming and outgoing signaling among different cell types suggest the potential for cross -talk 

among the m. To gain a deeper understanding of how enrichment of these and other pathways might 

orchestr ate resolution, we sought to determine which macrophage, fibroblast, and epithelial cell subtypes 

send and receive the relevant corresponding signals and to determine their pattern s of expression throughout 

resolution. Broadly assessing overall signaling strength within cell types longitudinally , we found that the 

magnitude of incoming and outgoing signaling was reduced during peak fibrosis compared to saline -treated 

control lungs , with further relative decline in signaling strength by day 63 (Supplemental Fig ure 2). We next 

sought to subcluster macrophages, mesenchymal cells, and epithelial cells and analyze them longitudinally. 

Fibrosis -associated macrophage s alter their signaling pathways and are largely cleared during 

spontaneous fibrosis resolution .

To more precisely characterize changes in lung macrophage subset s during fibrosis and resolution, clusters 

identified as “AMs ” and “IMs ” from the global UMAP analysis in Figure 1 were further subclustered. This 

approach revealed four distinct populations based on established marker genes (Fig ure 3A-B). Tissue -

resident AMs (TRAMs) exhibited high expression of SiglecF , Ear1 , Car4 , Cd11c (Itgax) and Fabp5 . Two IM 

populations were distinguished from TRAMs by elevated levels of CD11b (Itgam) , CX3CR1 , and C1qa , with 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

one distinct population expressing the vascular -associated marker Lyve1 . Finally , a cluster co -expressi ng 

both IM and TRAM markers appeared at peak fibrosis consistent with those described in previous studies of 

bleo -induced lung injury (10, 38, 39) . Furthermore , this population expressed many of the hallmark genes 

associated with a pro -fibrotic lung macrophage phenotype including Arg1 (39) , Spp1 (40, 41) , Trem2 (40, 42) ,

CD63 and Fabp5 (40) (Figure 3D, Supplemental Figure 3B). We thus label ed this cluster fibrosis -associated 

macrophages (FAMs) due to their appearance at peak fibrosis (day 21) and likewise enrichment in pro -fibrotic 

gene s. Notably, cell proportion analysis indicated a reduction in FAMs during the resolution phase (Fig ure 3C,

Supplemental Fig ure 3A ). To confirm the ir presence in vivo , we performed immunofluorescence (IF) 

microscopy on lung sections from saline -treated mice and those harvested on day 21 after bleo treatment. IF 

staining revealed the presence of Arg1+CD63+ macrophages at day 21, consistent with the ir detection by 

sc RNA -seq (Fig ure 3D-F). 

Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of the highest enriched pathways within each macrophage subtype 

demonstrated that FAM s were highly enriched for pathways related to sonic hedgehog (SHH), Notch1, and 

non -canonical Wnt signaling (as indicated by DVL degradation) , further supporting their pro -fibrotic /pro -

inflammatory phenotype. Interestingly, FAM s also demonstrated similar enhancement in the pathways 

enriched in IMs including those related to GPCR ligand binding – receptors canonically regulating calcium or 

cAMP signaling. TRAMs were enriched for arachidonate/eicosanoid and anti -Wnt signaling pathways (Fig ure 

3G). 

We next analyzed the enrichment of these pathways within macrophage subtypes over time to determine 

when , and to what relative degree, they are enriched during peak fibrosis and resolution. A parent reactome 

GSEA analysis of GPCR signaling within macrophage subtypes revealed that FAM s are highly enriched in 

Gαi and adenosine P1 activation (Supplemental Fig ure 3C). G αi functions to inhibit adenylyl cyclase and thus 

reduce intracellular cAMP generation. Adenosine P1 receptors are coupled to G -proteins that can either 

inhibit or activate adenylyl cyclase. Longitudinally , adenosine P1 receptors, and G αi enrichment generally, 

was found to be enriched in FAM s at day 21 (peak fibrosis ) yet declined during resolution (Fig ure 3H).

Further analysis reveal ed enrichment of the inhibitory A3 receptor in FAM s at day 21 along with stimulator y

A2 receptors at day 21 with decline throughout resolution (Supplemental Figure 3E). Complementary to th ese

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

finding s in FAM s, TRAMs exhibited a high degree of PKA activation (a downstream target of cAMP) and PKA -

mediated phosphorylation of CREB in control lungs, which diminished at peak fibrosis and then recovered 

during resolution (Fig ure 3H).

Both TRAMs and FAM s demonstrated enrichment for the inflammat ion -associated NOTCH1 and fibrosis 

cross -talk associated NOTCH3 signaling pathways at d ay 21 with substantial decline in each by day 63 

(Figure 3 I). Wnt5a was found to be the only significant ligand enriched within FAM s and TRAMs among this 

broad signaling pathway. In FAM s, Wnt5a signaling was highly enriched at d ay 21 while only modestly 

enriched in TRAMs at this time point compared to baseline ( Supplemental Fig ure 3D ). 

Fibroblasts exhibit dynamic pro - and anti -fibrotic phenotypes and signaling during spontaneous 

fibrosis resolution. 

Given the central role of mesenchymal cells in the pathogenesis of fibrosis – primarily through their promotion 

of excessive extracellular matrix deposition – we sought to more precisely delineate the specific contributions 

of distinct fibroblast subtypes to the resolution of fibrosis. Clusters annotated as “fibroblast,” “pericyte,” “SM ”,

and “mesothelial cells” from the global UMAP analysis were further subclustered and subjected to reanalysis. 

Within the fibroblast population, we identified peribronchial, adventitial, and alveolar fibroblast subtypes, 

distinguished by the expression of Hhip , Pi16 , and Scube2 , respectively (43) (Fig ure 4A -B). As previous ly 

noted , the proportions of these fibroblast subtypes amongst the overall mesenchymal compartment remained 

largely unchanged throughout the fibrosis resolution process in our whole lung digests (Fig ure 4C ). Prompted 

by recent studies indicating that pathologically relevant “fibrotic” fibroblast subsets may exist within the 

alveolar fibroblast population (19, 43) , we subclustered alveolar and adventitial fibroblasts based on their 

elevated expression levels of the fibrotic markers Col3a1 , Col1a1 and Pdgfra (Fig ure 4D). The presence of a

tdTomato lineage tag in mice subjected to sequencing helped to further confirm the importance of the alveolar 

and adventitial populations given its coupled expression to a Col1a2 promoter (Fig ure 4D, Supplemental 

Fig ure 4A). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

We identified a distinct subpopulation previously characterized as an "ECM -secreting" fibroblast phenotype 

(19) , as evidenced by elevated expression of Csmd1 , Spp1 , and Ltbp2 . This “ Csmd1 +” population was noted 

within the alveolar and adventitial fibroblast compartments (Fig ure 4E) as well as peribronchial and smooth 

muscle populations but absent in pericytes (Supplemental Fig ure 4B). Within the alveolar and adventitial 

compartment s, t he proportion of these cells increased substantially at day 21, before declining close to 

baseline levels by days 42 and 63 (Fig ure 4F). Within the peribronchial compartment , a similar pattern of 

enrichment and reduction to baseline control levels was observed (Supplemental Figure 4 C). Surprisingly ,

this ECM -secreting population did not express the pro -fibrotic marker Cth rc1 (data not shown) , which has 

previously been proposed as a marker of pathologic fibroblasts (43) .

We next performed GSEA to determine the highest enriched pathways in each fibroblast subtype. As 

expected, canonical pro -fibrotic pathways involved in TGF β, NOTCH, and hedgehog signaling were enriched 

in alveolar and adventitial fibroblasts at peak fibrosis (Supplemental Fig ure 4D). Notably , we found 

enhance ment of MET signaling – also known as hepatocyte growth factor receptor – within the alveolar 

fibroblast compartment. This pathway has been shown to be anti -fibrotic in the context of pulmonary fibrosis 

(44, 45) . Similar to the macrophage population, cAMP -signaling pathways – specifically adenylyl cyclase 

activation or inhibition – were found to be enriched in pericytes (Fig ure 4G) . The calcium -signaling GPCR 

coupled G -protein G αq was also found to be enriched in pericytes. Further investigation into a previously 

described subpopulation of putative “anti -fibrotic” fibroblasts, characterized by the expression of Cd248 , Pi16 ,

and Igfbp5 (19) , revealed no significant changes in their population frequency at any timepoint (data not 

shown ). This observation suggests that, as seen previously, more subtle alterations in cell signaling dynamics 

may play a more substantial role in the resolution of fibrosis than changes in cellular abundance. 

Longitudinal analysis of MET and GPCR -related pathways was performed to assess their relative enrichment 

throughout resolution. Within alveolar and adventitial fibroblasts , MET was found to be negatively regulated 

and associated with PTK2 (FAK) during peak fibrosis while its activation and interaction with various 

downstream mediators was enriched during resolution (Fig ure 4H) ; this is consistent with its role as an anti -

fibrotic signal . With regards to GPCR -mediated signaling , both cAMP and calcium -related pathways 

demonstrated dynamic enrichment during peak fibrosis and throughout resolution in alveolar and adventitial 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

fibroblast populations . Prostanoid and eicosanoid receptors – that often signal via cAMP – were found to be 

enriched in alveolar fibroblasts from saline -treated mice with reduced enrichment at peak fibrosis and 

throughout resolution. Additionally, G αi and adenylyl cyclase inhibitor signaling were enriched at peak fibrosis 

in both subtypes . However, PKA activation and PKA -mediated phosphorylation of CREB were enriched at 

day 63 in adventitial fibroblasts (Figure 4I) . In both alveolar and adventitial fibroblasts, G αq signaling was 

highly enriched at peak fibrosis and reduced throughout resolution. Importantly, FasL signaling was enriched 

by day 63 in both alveolar and adventitial fibroblasts (Fig ure 4J) consistent with possible apoptotic clearance 

of these cells .

Lung epithelial cells demonstrate enrich ment for pro -regenerative and pro -resolution pathways 

during spontaneous fibrosis resolution. 

Epithelial cells are highly susceptible to injury from environmental exposures, infections, and inflammatory 

processes. Injury -induced dysfunction of this cell population serves as a key driver in the development and 

progression of pulmonary fibrosis (46 -49) . While their role in the early inflammatory stages of pulmonary 

fibrosis has been extensively investigated, their status during the resolution phase of fibrosis is poorly 

understood . To address this gap in knowledge, we analyzed epithelial cell subtypes and evaluated their 

potential contributions to the mechanisms underlying fibrosis resolution. Clusters corresponding to “AT1,” 

“AT2,” “ ciliated ,” and “ club ” epithelial cell types were subclustered from the global UMAP and subsequently 

reanalyzed using estab lished cell -specific markers. This approach uncovered a “transitional ” population 

distinguished by expression of Krt8 , Sfn and Cldn4 (49) (Fig ure 5A -C; Supplemental Figure 5A ), which was 

closely aligned with both AT1 and AT2 clusters. This transitional subset was only evident in bleo -treated mice 

and demonstrated its highest proportion at peak fibrosis (d ay 21) , with its abundance diminishing by days 42 

and 63 ( Fig ure 5C and Supplemental Fig 5A ). Aside from this shift of transitional epithelial cells , the relative 

proportions of epithelial cells demonstrated a decline in AT1 cells and mild increase in club cells at peak 

fibrosis with relative stability throughout resolution (Figure 5C). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

Globally, GSEA identified enrichment of the pro -fibrotic TGF β pathway (transitional cells) and hedgehog 

signaling pathway (transitional and ciliated) (Fig ure 5D ). Activation of the putative anti -fibrotic HGF /MET 

pathway was found to be enriched in AT2 cells and, to a lesser degree, in transitional and ciliated cells .

Enrichment of cAMP -related pathways in AT2 and club cell s was demonstrated as indicated by enrich ment of 

the stimulatory G -protein (G αs) that activates adenylyl cyclase and generates intracellular cAMP. Finally, AT1 

cells were particularly enriched for activation of the mitogen receptor FGFR1 – a receptor family associated 

with alveolar regeneration and repair (50, 51) .

Longitudinally, GSEA enrichment of profibrotic pathways included enrichment of hedgehog signaling, WNT, 

and GLI3 -related NOTCH signaling during peak fibrosis in AT1 cells and WNT in AT2 cells (Supplemental Fig 

5C and D) . Mitogen enrichment , specifically FGFR signaling, was found to be negatively regulated at peak 

fibrosis with a switch towards increased FGFR 1 - 4 signaling by d ay 63 (Fig ure 5E). Similar to alveolar and 

adventitial fibroblasts, AT1 and AT2 cells exhibited negative regulation of HGF /MET activity during peak 

fibrosis and its interaction with PTK2 /FAK with a switch towards downstream effectors such as RAS, PTPN11, 

and interaction with tena scin proteins by day 63 (Fig ure 5F). Finally, pathways that modulate intracellular 

cAMP switched from an inhibitory tone on cAMP generation via G αi at peak fibrosis to a loss of Gαi

enrichment in favor of Gαs-coupled GPCR s by d ay 63 of resolution (Fig ure 5G) . This pattern of cAMP 

regulation broadly parallels findings in both macrophages and fibroblasts , namely cAMP activation appears to 

be inhibited during states of fibrosis and then re -activated during resolution .

Changes in cellular cross -talk among lung macrophage, fibroblast, and epithelial cell s during 

spontaneous fibrosis resolution. 

Building on our findings that highlighted increased cellular cross -talk between macrophage populations and 

fibroblasts (Fig ure 2B) , we sought to pinpoint how the defined macrophage, fibroblast, and epithelial cell 

subpopulations detailed in Figures 3 -5 contribute to the overall cell -cell communication network during 

fibrosis resolution. To achieve this, we performed CellChat analysis to map signaling interactions among 

alveolar fibroblasts, adventitial fibroblasts, FAM s, TRAMs, IMs, AT1 cells, and AT2 cells throughout the course 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

of fibrosis resolution. The total number of inferred interactions peak ed at d ay 21 and subsequently decline d at 

day 42 and d ay 63, indicating increased cell signaling during peak fibrosis that decreases during resolution –

though notably not back to baseline levels (Fig ure 6A) . The contribution of each cell subtype to the number of 

interactions at each time point was determined , demonstrating an increase in interactions among fibroblasts, 

epithelial cells, and FAM s at peak fibrosis (Fig ure 6B) . The number of interactions among FAM s remained 

constant throughout resolution while fibroblasts and AT1 displayed a steady reduction over time. AT2 cells 

were unique in their pattern of interactions that reached a nadir by d ay 42 with an increase back to baseline 

at d ay 63. It is notable that fibrobla sts demonstrated the highest number of interactions and exhibited 

stronger incoming and outg oing signaling activity at each timepoint compared to the other cell types 

(Sup plemental Fig ure 6A). Further delineat ion of the specific intercellular pathway interactions at peak 

fibrosis and during resolution was achieved by compar ing the overall information flow for each signaling 

pathway between d ay 21 and each resolution timepoint (Supplement al Figure 6B ). The net effect of many 

pathways is difficult to capture by global information flow; therefore, we sought to assess the directionality 

and relative intensity of signaling among cell types at peak fibrosis and throughout resolution . First, outgoing 

gene patterns – functionally linked groups of gene programs or pathways – were assigned to every cell 

sub type at each time point (Supplemental Fig ure 7, Supplemental Table 1 ). In saline -treated control s, each 

cell type exhibited a unique pattern ( Supplemental Fig 7A) whereas at peak fibrosis FAM s and TRAMs 

shared a signaling pattern. At day 42, FAMs established a unique pattern no t shared with other cell types and 

then adopted a pattern similar to IM s by day 63 (Supplemental Fig ure 7C, D & Supplemental Table 2 ).

Circos plots demonstrating relative signaling strength and directionality between cell types were generated for 

select pro -fibrotic or pro -resolution pathways predicted to be relevant during spontaneous fibrosis resolution 

by GSEA (Fig ure 3-5). Among profibrotic programs, SPP1 was produced by TRAMs and signaled to each 

other cell type present in control mice. FAM s contributed substantially as a source cell of SPP1 during peak 

fibrosis with minor contributions from AT1, AT2, and IMs. Interestingly , although SPP1 signalin g declined in 

intensity and no longer exhibited outgoing signaling from non -immune cells during resolution , FAM s

continued to produce SPP1 at d ay 63 (Fig ure 6C, top row of panel s). A similar pattern was found with the 

TGF β pathway in which FAM s exhibited substantial outgoing signal during peak fibrosis that remained at d ay 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

63 (Fig ure 6C, middle row of panel s). Another profibrotic pathway, BAFF (B -cell activating factor) (52) , was 

found to display more specific intercellular interactions. At baseline, IMs appear to receive BAFF signals from 

alveolar and adventitial fibroblasts with a shift in the recipient cell type to TRAMs and FAM s during peak 

fibrosis . Furthermore, FAM s become the exclusive recipient of BAFF signals by day 42 with a reduction in 

signaling inte nsity from fibroblasts by d ay 63 (Fig ure 6C, bottom row of panel s). 

The persistence of profibrotic SPP1 and TGF β signaling among cell types through d ay 63 suggests that the 

appearance of pro -resolution pathways – and not simply a decline in pro -fibrotic pathways – may be 

necessary to achieve spontaneous resolution. We therefore assessed anti -fibrotic molecular pathways which 

were predicted to be enriched by GSEA . Among them, the pro -resolution MET/HGF axis was found to be 

produced by alveolar fibroblasts and TRAMs at baseline with FAM s contributing during peak fibrosis and 

throughout resolution, albeit with lower intensity. Interestingly , AT2 cells were the only cell predicted to receive 

MET/HGF signals (Fig ure 6D, top ). TWEAK signaling at baseline demonstrated cross -talk among immune 

cells, fibroblasts, and epithelial cells with a substantial increase in outgoing signaling from FAM s to fibroblasts 

and epithelial cells on day 42 (Fig ure 6D, bottom) . The strength of TWEAK signaling in recipient cells is 

dependent upon the expression of its sole receptor, FN14. We therefore assessed the relative expression of 

FN14 transcript and found that its expression increased at day 42 and d ay 63 while declining in AT1 cells by 

day 63 (Fig ure 6E).

Pathways that signal through cAMP were also assessed. Prostaglandin signaling was robust among most cell 

types in control lungs with immune, AT1/AT2 , and fibroblast s serving as cellular sources. During peak fibrosis 

and resolution, outgoing prostaglandin signaling from AT2 and IM cells appeared to expand to now include 

fibroblasts as recipient cells (Fig ure 6F, top ). Adenosine , which signals via the GPCR s Adora 1, 2a, 2b, and 3 

demon strated baseline TRAM -to -AT2 communication which expanded to include FAM s at day 21 with a

return to baseline at d ay 42 and d ay 63 (Fig ure 6F, bottom) . Given that AT2 cells are predicted to be the main 

recipient cell of adenosine, we measured expression levels of Adora genes and found that only Adora 2b, a 

Gαs-coupled receptor , was appreciably expressed with its highest expression at baseline and peak fibrosis 

(Fig ure 6G) .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

DISCUSSION 

Therapeutic drug targets for fibrotic lung disease have historically been selected primarily for their 

ability to inhibit putative drivers of fibrosis . This strategy reflects the fact that a vast majority of fibrosis 

research has focus ed sole ly on the cellular and molecular determinants of fibrogenesis. By contrast, an 

alternative research paradigm seeking to explicate the endogenous mechanisms that underl y fibrosis 

resolution may identify essential processes absent during persistent fibrosis that are candidates for 

therapeutic restoration (1) . In particular , the cellular subtypes , signaling pathway s, and cross -talk that might 

enabl e and/or promot e fibrosis resolution as observed in the single -dose murine bleo model have not be en 

characterized. In this study we performed sc RNA -seq to determine the longitudinal cellular landscape ,

pathway enrichment , and cellular cross -talk operative during spontaneous fibrosis resolution in this model as 

it occurs in young normal healthy mice . Our findings highlight conspicuous shifts in FAM numbers and 

signaling as well as dynamic shifts in a recently characterized matrix -secreti ng fibroblast subtype ( Csmd1 +). 

Moreover, while signaling of many pro -fibrotic pathways were found to diminish by days 42 and 63 of 

resolution , our findings also suggest that anti -fibrotic MET/HGF, cAMP, and TWEAK signaling and cellular 

cross -talk is enriched during resolution .

A hallmark of lung fibrosis is the persistence of aberrant cell ular phenotypes that contribute to its 

defining pathobiological features, including alveolar damage, dysregulated cellular integrity and survival , and 

excessive matrix deposition (1, 53) . We therefore predicted that shifts in cellular subtypes among immune, 

mesenchymal, and epithelial cells would be evident throughout resolution. To our surprise, we did not 

observe substantial changes in the proportion s of fibroblast or epithelial subtypes evident in UMAPs. Though 

a small transitional epithelial cell cluster was observed at d ay 21, this is likely to be a remnant population that 

peaked earlier during the fibrotic response (49) with gradual decline throughout resolution . It will be important 

for future studies to determine the possible role of transitional epithelial cells in models of persistent fibrosis. 

Among mesenchymal cells, we did identify a small Csmd1 + fibroblast population present within alveolar, 

adventitial, and peribronchial subsets recently characterized to be pro -fibrotic (19) . Although the wider 

significance of this fibroblast population remains to be further characterized in future studies, we found that it 

expressed high levels of pro -fibrotic genes (SPP1 and LTBP2 ) and that it declined by day 42 and through day 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

63 (Fig. 4F) . The lack of substantial Cthrc1 expression in our model is notable and possibly explained by the 

lower dose of bleo (1.0 U/kg) we employed compared to other studies (54) as well as the lack of fibroblast 

enrichment .

The most conspicuous longitudinal cellular change in our study was among FAM s. Essentially absent 

in control lungs, FAMs expanded and peaked at d ay 21 following bleo, gradually declin ing throughout 

resolution (Fig ure 3C, Supplemental Figure 3A). Similar macrophage cell population s expressing fibrosis -

associated genes as well as IM and TRAM markers ha ve been identified and characterized during bleo -

induced inflammatory and fibrotic phases by other groups (10, 15, 38, 40) . It has been proposed that these 

cells may be derived from IMs and ultimately transition into AMs (10, 39) . The recent study by Lin et al (38) 

advances this notion by demonstrating the emergence of a pro -fibrotic “Mac0” population by day 7 post -bleo 

originating from recruited monocytes and persisting through day 28 . Furthermore, the study demonstrates 

that recruited monocyte -derived macrophages undergo an IM -to -AM transition via a Mac0 transient state . In 

our study, FAM s display ed a close UMAP alignment to IMs and TRAMs similar that of the Mac0 population 

(38) . Additionally, the relative proportions of FAMs on day 21 are consistent with the Mac0 trends between 

days 14 and 28. Th ese promin ent parallels suggest that FAMs and Mac0 s may indeed represent the same 

cell population. Although the paucity of FAMs in untreated mouse lungs suggest s that they represent a

recruited population , our study did not assess earlier time points following bleo administration ( days 3, 7, and 

14 ) or utilize lineage tracing to determine whether FAMs are indeed recruited. Furthermore, we acknowledge 

that the pro -fibrotic phenotype of these macrophages is associative and has not been experimentally 

demonstrated. 

Our finding that epithelial, mesenchymal, and immune cell subtype proportions ( except for FAM s) 

remained essentially constant during resolution strongly suggests that more subtle changes – inconspicuous 

by UMAP – might be responsible for fibrosis resolution and a trajectory toward re -establishing lung 

homeostasis. Furthermore, as lung homeostasis and repair reflect the dynamic communication among 

immune, mesenchymal, and epithelial cells (55 -57) , shifts in cellular crosstalk are likely to be an important 

part of the resolution process . Indeed, o ur single -cell analysis confirmed a rich interplay of bidirectional 

signaling among these cell types during fibrosis and its spontaneous resolution (Fig ure 2B). GSEA revealed a

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

decline in pro -fibrotic signaling over time in immune , mesenchymal , and epithelial cell subtypes , including 

NOTCH (fibroblasts and FAM s), Hedgehog (fibroblasts, AT1) , and WNT signaling (fibroblasts, TRAMs, FAM s) 

(Fig ure 3H and 3J, Supplemental Fig ure 3C , 4D, 5C & D ). Additionally, a reduction in signaling strength was 

observed in SPP1, TGF β, and BAFF signaling (Fig ure 6C) , consistent with what would be expected in a 

resolving environment. However , the se signaling strength or cross -talk patterns (in the case of BAFF) did not 

return all the way to baseline. Other pathways such as MIF and PDGF did not appear to appreciably diminish, 

instead maintaining a complex network of cellular cross -talk (Supplemental Fig ure 8). The pro -fibrotic actions 

of MIF depend on its ligation of CD74 in Cx3cr1 expressing lung ma crophages (32) . In our study, FAM s and 

IMs expressed the highest transcript levels of Cx3cr1 (Figure 3B) and it is thus notable that only the 

canonically pro -fibrotic FAM s exhibited a decline in CD74 expression during resolution , though not to baseline 

levels (Supplemental Figure 9). Such p ersistent enrichment of some pro -fibrotic signaling pathways may 

reflect the fact that complete restoration of cellular homeostasis requires longer than 63 days or that, despite 

evidence of histopathologic resolution, there is a kind of cellular priming that persists following injury. The 

latter explanation is consistent with the observation that repetitive injury models lead to persistent fibrosis 

(58) . The pathways GDF and GAS – which can contribute to either pro -fibrotic or pro -resolution signaling (59 -

61) – were also highly enriched in control and bleo -treated lungs at each time point (Supplemental Fig ure 8). 

It is possible that ongoing pro -fibrotic signaling at d ays 42 and d ays 63 must be counterbalanced by 

concomitant upregulation or switching to pro -resolution pathways. 

Indeed, longitudinal a nalysis revealed enrichment of several putative pro -resolution pathways over 

time . The HGF/MET axis was found to be enriched in AT2 cells where it has been demonstrated to favor 

epithelial restitution (62, 63) as well as in fibroblasts where it functions to oppose TGF β signaling and 

sensitize them to apoptosis (64, 65) . The negative regulation of MET on day 21 with a switch to its activation 

of downstream targets (such as PTPN11, RAS, TNS proteins ) by day 63 is consiste nt with such pro -resolving 

function s. The e nrichment of MET -mediated activation of PTK2/FAK at d ay 21 in fibroblasts , which is 

predicted to confe r pro -fibrotic properties (66, 67) , diminishe s by d ay 42 . Another signaling switch observed 

during resolution involves FGF signaling within alveolar epithelial cells. The inhibition of FGFRs at d ay 21 

stands in contrast to their activation by d ay 63 in AT1 and AT2 cells (Fig ure 5E). FGFR2 signaling in AT2 cells 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

is known to favor their maintenance and recovery after injury (28) and to regulate the balance of AT2 -to -AT1 

differentiation (51, 68) . As FGF2 is known to expand fibroblast populations through proliferation and promote 

their survival (69, 70) , nintedanib (an inhibitor of FGFR2, VEGFR, and PDGFR) is approved to treat IPF and 

progressive pulmonary fibrosis. However, given the pro -resolution effects of FGFR2 signaling within alveolar 

epithelial cells, one might speculate that nintedanib could limit its own efficacy by hampering AT2 

maintenance .

The significance of TWEAK enrichment at peak fibrosis and throughout resolution (Fig ure 6D) 

depends upon its interaction with its receptor Fn14 (71) . Furthermore, although TWEAK -Fn14 signaling has 

been reported to exhibit anti -fibrotic effects in the lung (34) , it has similarly been found to promote fibrosis in 

the kidney (72) . This dichotomy may be attributed to fibroblast deactivation and recruitment of pro -resolution 

macrophage s in the lung (34) as opposed to fibroblast expansion and inflammation in the kidney (73) .

Sustained epithelial TWEAK -Fn14 signaling could also account for its profibrotic actions in the kidney and 

other organs (74) . Assessing the longitudinal expression of Fn14 in epithelial cells and fibroblasts in our 

model, we found that Fn14 declined substantial ly by d ay 63 in AT1 cells and increased its expression in 

fibroblasts throughout resolution (Fig ure 6E). Dynamic and complementary expression patterns of Fn14 in 

AT1 cells and fibroblasts during spontaneous resolution thus appear to be consistent with the previously 

described anti -fibrotic effects of TWEAK -Fn14 in the lung. 

An important and consistent finding from longitudinal GSEA is the temporal regulation of intracellular 

cAMP signaling. Specifically, inhibition of adenylyl cyclase via G αi was found to occur at peak fibrosis with a 

switch to cAMP pathway activation evidenced by G αs-coupled GPCR or PKA activation of CREB enrichment 

by d ay 63 (Fig ure 3I, 4I, 5G). This pattern is consistent with the putative anti -fibrotic actions of cAMP within 

immune, mesenchymal, and epithelial cell populations in the lung (75) . Though these observations suggest a 

potential endogenous role for cAMP during resolution, the operative GPCRs responsible for generating 

intracellular cAMP within each of the pivotal cell types remain unclear. Neither receptors for prostag landin 

family members nor adenosine – which can each activate or inhibit adenylyl cyclase through various GPCRs 

– revealed concrete patterns consistent with the timely activation of cAMP following peak fibrosis observed in 

each cell type by GSEA . One exception may be adenosine signaling in AT2 cells which primarily expressed 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

the G αs-coupled Adora2b transcript (Fig ure 6G). It is conceivable that early endogenous pro -resolution 

signaling may overlap with peak fibrosis. Consistent with the reported ability of cAMP via prostaglandin 

signaling to increase fibroblast expression of the death receptor Fas (76) , both alveolar and adventi ti al 

fibroblasts showed enrichment in FasL signaling – a crucial step for spontaneous resolution (6) . The potential 

contributions of cAMP signaling to spontaneous fibrosis resolution in our model are especially notable 

considering that the recently approved IPF drug nerandomilast functions to inhibit the breakdown of cAMP 

(77) as well as the recent phase 3 success of stimulating cAMP generation through inhaled treprostinil in IPF 

(78) .

This study ha s several limitations. First, single -cell sequencing, by its nature, is associative and 

hypothesis -generating , as mRNA transcripts do not fully correlate with protein expression and cannot 

precisely predict cellular phenotype/function . It is therefore important that pathways and cell -cell interactions 

that plausibly impact fibrosis resolution be confirmed in the appropriate experimental context. Next, our use of 

a relatively low dose of bleo (1.0 U/kg) to ensure timely resolution may , for example, account for the lack of 

Cthrc1 + fibroblasts observed during peak fibrosis and thus does not fully represent the extent of lung fibrosis 

in human IPF . We acknowledge that our findings will need to be independently reproduced with a larger 

number of mice . Finally, the significance of the potentially pro -resolving cellular transitions, signaling 

pathways , and cross -talk identified herein would be substantially strengthened if these were shown to be 

impaired or deficient in experimental model s of non -resolving and persistent fibrosis. Overall, our findings 

suggest a rich milieu of cellular cross -talk in the lung as well as dynamic enrichment of pro -fibrotic and pro -

resolution pathways during peak fibrosis and throughout fibrosis resolution . Additional interrogation of these 

pathways and patterns in the future may further illuminate our understanding of fibrosis outcome s and their 

therapeutic modulation. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

Acknowledgments 

This work was funded by NIH grants R35 HL144979 (to MPG), K08 HL163178 (to SMF) , R35 HL160770 (to 

RLZ) , R01 HL175555 (to TB), Hevolution HF -AGE award (C.A.A.), National Science Foundation CAREER 

award (2045977), the Department of Defense and Congressionally Directed Medical Research Program 

W81XWH2010336 and W81XWH2110491 (C.A.A.), Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) 

“BETR” award D20AC0002 (C.A.A.) awarded by the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI), Interior Business 

Center. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official 

views of the National Institutes of Health or National Science Foundatio n, the position or the policy of the 

Government, and no official endorsement should be inferred . All Figure schematics were created with 

BioRender (BioRender.com). 

Author contributions 

JS, NMW, MPG, and SMF designed the experiments. Experiments were performed by JS, NMW, and SMF. 

Bioinformatics were performed by JS, VW, and YL. Data were analyzed by JS, VW, SG, CA, MPG, and SMF .

Intellectual contributions were provided by TB and RZ. The manuscript was written by JS and SMF. All 

authors reviewed the manuscript. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

REFERENCES 

1. Fortier SM, Redente EF, Peters -Golden M. Reimagining Fibrosis Research, Outcomes, and Therapeutics 

Through the Lens of Resolution. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2025; 46: 298 -310. 

2. Glasser SW, Hagood JS, Wong S, Taype CA, Madala SK, Hardie WD. Mechanisms of Lung Fibrosis 

Resolution. Am J Pathol 2016; 186: 1066 -1077. 

3. B BM, Lawson WE, Oury TD, Sisson TH, Raghavendran K, Hogaboam CM. Animal models of fibrotic lung 

disease. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2013; 49: 167 -179. 

4. Lawson WE, Polosukhin VV, Stathopoulos GT, Zoia O, Han W, Lane KB, et al. Increased and prolonged 

pulmonary fibrosis in surfactant protein C -deficient mice following intratracheal bleomycin. Am J 

Pathol 2005; 167: 1267 -1277. 

5. Phan SH, Armstrong G, Sulavik MC, Schrier D, Johnson KJ, Ward PA. A comparative study of pulmonary 

fibrosis induced by bleomycin and an O2 metabolite producing enzyme system. Chest 1983; 83: 44S -

45S. 

6. Redente EF, Chakraborty S, Sajuthi S, Black BP, Edelman BL, Seibold MA, et al. Loss of Fas signaling in 

fibroblasts impairs homeostatic fibrosis resolution and promotes persistent pulmonary fibrosis. JCI 

Insight 2020; 6. 

7. Fortier SM, Walker NM, Penke LR, Baas JD, Shen Q, Speth JM, et al. MAPK phosphatase 1 inhibition of 

p38alpha within lung myofibroblasts is essential for spontaneous fibrosis resolution. J Clin Invest 

2024; 134. 

8. Pan T, Feng Y, Li Y, Yang Y, Zhou J, Song Y. Exacerbation of pulmonary fibrosis following acute lung injury 

via activin -A production by recruited alveolar macrophages. Journal of Thoracic Disease 2024; 16: 

7709 -7728. 

9. Penke LR, Speth JM, Huang SK, Fortier SM, Baas J, Peters -Golden M. KLF4 is a therapeutically tractable 

brake on fibroblast activation that promotes resolution of pulmonary fibrosis. JCI Insight 2022; 7. 

10. Aran D, Looney AP, Liu L, Wu E, Fong V, Hsu A, et al. Reference -based analysis of lung single -cell 

sequencing reveals a transitional profibrotic macrophage. Nature Immunology 2019; 20: 163 -172. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

11. Jin C, Chen Y, Wang Y, Li J, Liang J, Zheng S, et al. Single -cell RNA sequencing reveals special basal 

cells and fibroblasts in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Scientific Reports 2024; 14. 

12. Mayr CH, Santacruz D, Jarosch S, Bleck M, Dalton J, Mcnabola A, et al. Spatial transcriptomic 

characterization of pathologic niches in IPF. Science Advances 2024; 10. 

13. Reyfman PA, Walter JM, Joshi N, Anekalla KR, McQuattie -Pimentel AC, Chiu S, et al. Single -Cell 

Transcriptomic Analysis of Human Lung Provides Insights into the Pathobiology of Pulmonary 

Fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2019; 199: 1517 -1536. 

14. Vannan A, Lyu R, Williams AL, Negretti NM, Mee ED, Hirsh J, et al. Title (In press). 

15. Wang S, Li J, Wu C, Lei Z, Wang T, Huang X, et al. Single -Cell RNA Sequencing Reveals Monocyte -

Derived Interstitial Macrophages with a Pro -Fibrotic Phenotype in Bleomycin -Induced Pulmonary 

Fibrosis. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 2024; 25: 11669. 

16. Zhang T, Hou Z, Ding Z, Wang P, Pan X, Li X. Single Cell <scp>RNA</scp> ‐Seq Identifies Cell 

Subpopulations Contributing to Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis in Humans. Journal of Cellular and 

Molecular Medicine 2025; 29. 

17. Zhou Y, Tong Z, Zhu X, Wu C, Zhou Y, Dong Z. Deciphering the cellular and molecular landscape of 

pulmonary fibrosis through single -cell sequencing and machine learning. Journal of Translational 

Medicine 2025; 23. 

18. Zhu M, Yi Y, Jiang K, Liang Y, Li L, Zhang F, et al. Single ‐cell combined with transcriptome sequencing to 

explore the molecular mechanism of cell communication in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Journal of 

Cellular and Molecular Medicine 2024; 28. 

19. Guo JL, Griffin M, Yoon JK, Lopez DM, Zhu Y, Lu JM, et al. Histological signatures map anti -fibrotic 

factors in mouse and human lungs. Nature 2025; 641: 993 -1004. 

20. McGinnis CS, Murrow LM, Gartner ZJ. DoubletFinder: Doublet Detection in Single -Cell RNA Sequencing 

Data Using Artificial Nearest Neighbors. Cell Syst 2019; 8: 329 -337 e324. 

21. Guo M, Morley MP, Jiang C, Wu Y, Li G, Du Y, et al. Guided construction of single cell reference for 

human and mouse lung. Nat Commun 2023; 14: 4566. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

22. Tabula Muris C. A single -cell transcriptomic atlas characterizes ageing tissues in the mouse. Nature 2020; 

583: 590 -595. 

23. Strunz M, Simon LM, Ansari M, Kathiriya JJ, Angelidis I, Mayr CH, et al. Alveolar regeneration through a 

Krt8+ transitional stem cell state that persists in human lung fibrosis. Nat Commun 2020; 11: 3559. 

24. Redente EF, Keith RC, Janssen W, Henson PM, Ortiz LA, Downey GP, et al. Tumor necrosis factor -alpha 

accelerates the resolution of established pulmonary fibrosis in mice by targeting profibrotic lung 

macrophages. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2014; 50: 825 -837. 

25. Jin S, Plikus MV, Nie Q. CellChat for systematic analysis of cell -cell communication from single -cell 

transcriptomics. Nat Protoc 2025; 20: 180 -219. 

26. Liu H, Coarfa C, Charania AN, Larson -Casey JL, Rosas IO, He C. Secreted Phosphoprotein 1 in Lung 

Diseases. Metabolites 2025; 15: 365. 

27. Laddha AP, Kulkarni YA. VEGF and FGF -2: Promising targets for the treatment of respiratory disorders. 

Respir Med 2019; 156: 33 -46. 

28. Antoniades HN, Bravo MA, Avila RE, Galanopoulos T, Neville -Golden J, Maxwell M, et al. Platelet -derived 

growth factor in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. J Clin Invest 1990; 86: 1055 -1064. 

29. Bonner JC. Regulation of PDGF and its receptors in fibrotic diseases. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 2004; 

15: 255 -273. 

30. Baxter SK, Irizarry -Caro RA, Vander Heiden JA, Arron JR. Breaking the cycle: should we target 

inflammation, fibrosis, or both? Front Immunol 2025; 16: 1569501. 

31. Stawski L, Trojanowska M. Oncostatin M and its role in fibrosis. Connect Tissue Res 2019; 60: 40 -49. 

32. Kim SH, Nouws J, Ruwisch J, Woodard GA, Cooley J, Khoury J, et al. Dysregulated alveolar type 2 

epithelial cell proteostasis promotes fibrogenic macrophage migration inhibitory factor -CD74 signaling. 

Sci Transl Med 2025; 17: eadr2277. 

33. Kim BM, Lee YJ, Choi YH, Park EM, Kang JL. Gas6 Ameliorates Inflammatory Response and Apoptosis 

in Bleomycin -Induced Acute Lung Injury. Biomedicines 2021; 9. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

34. Liu L, Wu P, Wei Y, Lu M, Ge H, Wang P, et al. TWEAK -Fn14 signaling protects mice from pulmonary 

fibrosis by inhibiting fibroblast activation and recruiting pro -regenerative macrophages. Cell Rep 2025; 

44: 115220. 

35. Dai Z, Song G, Balakrishnan A, Yang T, Yuan Q, Mobus S, et al. Growth differentiation factor 11 

attenuates liver fibrosis via expansion of liver progenitor cells. Gut 2020; 69: 1104 -1115. 

36. Sawant H, Borthakur A. Disease -Specific Novel Role of Growth Differentiation Factor 15 in Organ 

Fibrosis. Int J Mol Sci 2025; 26. 

37. Ye Q, Taleb SJ, Zhao J, Zhao Y. Emerging role of BMPs/BMPR2 signaling pathway in treatment for 

pulmonary fibrosis. Biomed Pharmacother 2024; 178: 117178. 

38. Jin H, Mou J, Zhu H, Liu K, Zhang M, Zhang Z, et al. Lineage tracing reveals the origins and dynamics of 

macrophages in lung injury and repair. Cell Discov 2026; 12: 3. 

39. Yadav P, Gomez Ortega J, Dabral P, Tamaki W, Chien C, Chang KC, et al. Myeloid -mesenchymal 

crosstalk drives ARG1 -dependent profibrotic metabolism via ornithine in lung fibrosis. J Clin Invest 

2025; 135. 

40. Fabre T, Barron AMS, Christensen SM, Asano S, Bound K, Lech MP, et al. Identification of a broadly 

fibrogenic macrophage subset induced by type 3 inflammation. Sci Immunol 2023; 8: eadd8945. 

41. King EM, Zhao Y, Moore CM, Steinhart B, Anderson KC, Vestal B, et al. Gpnmb and Spp1 mark a 

conserved macrophage injury response masking fibrosis -specific programming in the lung. JCI Insight 

2024; 9. 

42. Cui H, Banerjee S, Xie N, Hussain M, Jaiswal A, Liu H, et al. TREM2 promotes lung fibrosis via controlling 

alveolar macrophage survival and pro -fibrotic activity. Nature Communications 2025; 16. 

43. Tsukui T, Wolters PJ, Sheppard D. Alveolar fibroblast lineage orchestrates lung inflammation and fibrosis. 

Nature 2024; 631: 627 -634. 

44. Crestani B, Marchand -Adam S, Quesnel C, Plantier L, Borensztajn K, Marchal J, et al. Hepatocyte growth 

factor and lung fibrosis. Proc Am Thorac Soc 2012; 9: 158 -163. 

45. Panganiban RA, Day RM. Hepatocyte growth factor in lung repair and pulmonary fibrosis. Acta 

Pharmacol Sin 2011; 32: 12 -20. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

46. Bocchi E, Pitozzi V, Pontis S, Caruso PL, Beghi S, Caputi M, et al. Investigation of Aberrant Basaloid 

Cells in a Rat Model of Lung Fibrosis. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) 2024; 29: 305. 

47. Chakraborty A, Mastalerz M, Ansari M, Schiller HB, Staab -Weijnitz CA. Emerging Roles of Airway 

Epithelial Cells in Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis. Cells 2022; 11. 

48. Ting C, Konopka K, Benedeck RE, Riches DWH, Redente EF, Oldham JM, et al. Biomarkers Unveil 

Insights into Pathology of Transitional Epithelial States in Pulmonary Fibrosis. Am J Respir Crit Care 

Med 2024; 210: 687 -690. 

49. Wang F, Ting C, Riemondy KA, Douglas M, Foster K, Patel N, et al. Regulation of epithelial transitional 

states in murine and human pulmonary fibrosis. J Clin Invest 2023; 133. 

50. Dorry SJ, Ansbro BO, Ornitz DM, Mutlu GM, Guzy RD. FGFR2 Is Required for AEC2 Homeostasis and 

Survival after Bleomycin -induced Lung Injury. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2020; 62: 608 -621. 

51. Shimbori C, El Agha E. Good Things Come in 2s: Type 2 Alveolar Epithelial Cells and Fibroblast Growth 

Factor Receptor 2. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2020; 62: 543 -545. 

52. Francois A, Chatelus E, Wachsmann D, Sibilia J, Bahram S, Alsaleh G, et al. B lymphocytes and B -cell 

activating factor promote collagen and profibrotic markers expression by dermal fibroblasts in 

systemic sclerosis. Arthritis Res Ther 2013; 15: R168. 

53. Horowitz JC, Thannickal VJ. Mechanisms for the Resolution of Organ Fibrosis. Physiology (Bethesda) 

2019; 34: 43 -55. 

54. Tsukui T, Sun KH, Wetter JB, Wilson -Kanamori JR, Hazelwood LA, Henderson NC, et al. Collagen -

producing lung cell atlas identifies multiple subsets with distinct localization and relevance to fibrosis. 

Nat Commun 2020; 11: 1920. 

55. Planer JD, Morrisey EE. After the Storm: Regeneration, Repair, and Reestablishment of Homeostasis 

Between the Alveolar Epithelium and Innate Immune System Following Viral Lung Injury. Annu Rev 

Pathol 2023; 18: 337 -359. 

56. Song L, Li K, Chen H, Xie L. Cell Cross -Talk in Alveolar Microenvironment: From Lung Injury to Fibrosis. 

Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2024; 71: 30 -42. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

57. Wang Y, Wang L, Ma S, Cheng L, Yu G. Repair and regeneration of the alveolar epithelium in lung injury. 

FASEB J 2024; 38: e23612. 

58. Redente EF, Black BP, Backos DS, Bahadur AN, Humphries SM, Lynch DA, et al. Persistent, Progressive 

Pulmonary Fibrosis and Epithelial Remodeling in Mice. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2021; 64: 669 -676. 

59. Ban J, Qian J, Zhang C, Li J. Recent advances in TAM mechanisms in lung diseases. J Transl Med 2025; 

23: 479. 

60. Suzuki A, Sakamoto K, Nakahara Y, Enomoto A, Hino J, Ando A, et al. BMP3b Is a Novel Antifibrotic 

Molecule Regulated by Meflin in Lung Fibroblasts. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2022; 67: 446 -458. 

61. Takenouchi Y, Kitakaze K, Tsuboi K, Okamoto Y. Growth differentiation factor 15 facilitates lung fibrosis by 

activating macrophages and fibroblasts. Exp Cell Res 2020; 391: 112010. 

62. Cahill EF, Kennelly H, Carty F, Mahon BP, English K. Hepatocyte Growth Factor Is Required for 

Mesenchymal Stromal Cell Protection Against Bleomycin -Induced Pulmonary Fibrosis. Stem Cells 

Transl Med 2016; 5: 1307 -1318. 

63. Gazdhar A, Temuri A, Knudsen L, Gugger M, Schmid RA, Ochs M, et al. Targeted gene transfer of 

hepatocyte growth factor to alveolar type II epithelial cells reduces lung fibrosis in rats. Hum Gene 

Ther 2013; 24: 105 -116. 

64. Mizuno S, Matsumoto K, Li MY, Nakamura T. HGF reduces advancing lung fibrosis in mice: a potential 

role for MMP -dependent myofibroblast apoptosis. FASEB J 2005; 19: 580 -582. 

65. Shukla MN, Rose JL, Ray R, Lathrop KL, Ray A, Ray P. Hepatocyte growth factor inhibits epithelial to 

myofibroblast transition in lung cells via Smad7. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2009; 40: 643 -653. 

66. Kinoshita K, Aono Y, Azuma M, Kishi J, Takezaki A, Kishi M, et al. Antifibrotic effects of focal adhesion 

kinase inhibitor in bleomycin -induced pulmonary fibrosis in mice. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 2013; 49: 

536 -543. 

67. Lagares D, Busnadiego O, Garcia -Fernandez RA, Kapoor M, Liu S, Carter DE, et al. Inhibition of focal 

adhesion kinase prevents experimental lung fibrosis and myofibroblast formation. Arthritis Rheum 

2012; 64: 1653 -1664. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

68. Brownfield DG, de Arce AD, Ghelfi E, Gillich A, Desai TJ, Krasnow MA. Alveolar cell fate selection and 

lifelong maintenance of AT2 cells by FGF signaling. Nat Commun 2022; 13: 7137. 

69. Fortier SM, Penke LR, King D, Pham TX, Ligresti G, Peters -Golden M. Myofibroblast dedifferentiation 

proceeds via distinct transcriptomic and phenotypic transitions. JCI Insight 2021; 6. 

70. Guzy RD, Li L, Smith C, Dorry SJ, Koo HY, Chen L, et al. Pulmonary fibrosis requires cell -autonomous 

mesenchymal fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling. J Biol Chem 2017; 292: 10364 -10378. 

71. Wiley SR, Cassiano L, Lofton T, Davis -Smith T, Winkles JA, Lindner V, et al. A novel TNF receptor family 

member binds TWEAK and is implicated in angiogenesis. Immunity 2001; 15: 837 -846. 

72. Zhang Y, Zeng W, Xia Y. TWEAK/Fn14 axis is an important player in fibrosis. J Cell Physiol 2021; 236: 

3304 -3316. 

73. Gomez IG, Roach AM, Nakagawa N, Amatucci A, Johnson BG, Dunn K, et al. TWEAK -Fn14 Signaling 

Activates Myofibroblasts to Drive Progression of Fibrotic Kidney Disease. J Am Soc Nephrol 2016; 27: 

3639 -3652. 

74. Burkly LC. Regulation of Tissue Responses: The TWEAK/Fn14 Pathway and Other TNF/TNFR 

Superfamily Members That Activate Non -Canonical NFkappaB Signaling. Front Immunol 2015; 6: 92. 

75. Peters -Golden M, Fortier SM. Mechanistic basis for the antifibrotic actions of cAMP -based therapies. Eur 

Respir Rev 2026; 35. 

76. Huang SK, White ES, Wettlaufer SH, Grifka H, Hogaboam CM, Thannickal VJ, et al. Prostaglandin E(2) 

induces fibroblast apoptosis by modulating multiple survival pathways. FASEB J 2009; 23: 4317 -4326. 

77. Reininger D, Wolf F, Mayr CH, Wespel SL, Laufhaeger N, Geillinger -Kastle K, et al. Insights into the 

Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms behind the Antifibrotic Effects of Nerandomilast. Am J Respir Cell 

Mol Biol 2025; 73: 700 -712. 

78. Nathan SD, Smith P, Deng C, De Salvo M, Wuyts W, Pavie -Gallegos J, et al. Inhaled Treprostinil for 

Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis. N Engl J Med 2026. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

MAIN FIGURES 

Figure 1: Longitudinal scRNA sequencing of the mouse lung during spontaneous fibrosis resolution. 

(A) Schematic illustrating the single -dose bleomycin protocol. (B) Masson’s trichrome staining of right lower 

lobe sections demonstrating spontaneous fibrosis resolution. (C) Schematic detailing generation of whole 

lung digest, library prep, single -cell RNA sequencing and analysis. (D) Compiled Uniform Manifold 

Approximation and Projection (UMAP) plot with cell annotation of whole lung digests at each time point 

condition. (E) Dot plot displaying top gene expression for each annotated cell type in D. (F) Cluster graph 

displaying longitudinal cell type composition. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

Figure 2: Relative intercellular signaling strength , cross -talk, and pathway enrichment among lung 

cells during fibrosis resolution. (A) Dot plot depicting relative incoming and outgoing interaction strength 

by all annotated cell types. (B) Heat map depicting relative number of interactions between sender cell types 

(y -axis) and receiver cell types (x -axis). (C) Heat map of top enriched pat hways among fibroblast, type I 

(AT1), type II (AT2) alveolar epithelial cells, and alveolar macrophages (AMs). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint 33 

Figure 3: Fibrosis -associated macrophages alter their signaling pathways and are largely cleared 

during spontaneous fibrosis resolution. (A) UMAP of macrophage subclusters displa ying tissue resident 

alveolar macrophages (TRAMs), interstitial macrophages (IMs) , Lyve1+ IMs , and transitiona l macrophages 

(FAM s). (B) Dot plot of representative markers for each macrophage subtype. (C) Cluster graph displaying 

long itu dinal cell type composition of macrophage subtypes. Feature p lot displaying pro -fibrotic FAM -signature 

genes (Arg1, Spp1, Trem2) (D) and v iolin plot of module scores assigned to Arg1+ Spp1+ Trem2+ FAM 

subtypes ( E) over time. (F) Representative immunofluorescent microscopy images of CD63 and Arg1 staining 

in FAM s from control and d21 fibrotic lungs . (G) Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) of top enriched 

pathways within macrophage subclusters . H & I: Longitudinal GSEA of selected pathways related to cAMP 

(H) and NOTCH signaling (I) and related pathways within FAM and TRAM subsets. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint 35 

Figure 4 : Fibroblasts exhibit dynamic pro - and anti -fibrotic phenotypes and signaling during 

spontaneous fibrosis resolution. (A) UMAP of mesenchymal cell subclusters. (B) Dot plot of representative 

markers for each mesenchymal subset. (C) Cluster graph displaying longitudinal cell type composition of 

mesenchymal subtypes. (D) Feature plots demonstrating relative expression of tdTomato linea ge tag and 

fibroblast associated genes among mesenchymal cell subsets . (E) Feature plot of “ECM -secreting” fibroblast 

sub type within alveolar and adventitial subclu sters. (F) Violin plot of module scores assigned to Csmd1+ 

Spp1+ Ltbp2+ ECM -secreting fibroblasts over time. (G) GSEA of top enriched pathways among 

mesenchymal cell s. H-J: Longitudinal GSEA of selected HGF/MET (H), cAMP (I), and FasL /CD95L (J) 

signaling and related pathways in alveolar and adventitial fibroblasts. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

Figure 5 : Lung epithelial cells are enriched for pro -regenerative and pro -resolution pathways during 

spontaneous fibrosis resolution . (A) UMAP of epithelial cell subclusters. (B) Dot plot of representative 

markers for each epithelial subset. (C) Cluster graph displaying longitudinal cell type composition of epithelial 

subtypes. (D) GSEA of top enriched pathways among lung epithelial cells. E-G: Longitudinal GSEA of FGF 

(E), HGF/MET (F), and cAMP signaling and related pathways in AT1 and AT2 cells. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint 38 

Figure 6 : Changes in cellular cross -talk among lung fibroblast, macrophage, and epithelial cells 

during spontaneous fibrosis resolution. A & B: Longitudinal quantification of the total (A) and cell -specific 

(B) number of inferred interactions among alveolar fibroblasts, adventitial fibroblasts, FAM s, TRAMs, IMs, AT1 

cells, and AT2 cells . C, D, and F: Circos plots depicting longitudinal cellular cross -talk of the profibrotic 

pathways SPP1, TGF β, and BAFF (C), anti -fibrotic HGF/MET and TWEAK (D), and cAMP -related 

Prostaglandin and Adenosine (F) among the indicated cell subtypes . (E) Relative longitudinal expression of 

the TWEAK receptor Fn14 transcript in AT1, adventitial fibroblasts, and alveolar fibroblasts. (G) Relative 

longitudinal expression of the G αs-coupled Adora2b transcript in AT2 cells. Circos plots: line thickness is 

proportional to signaling strength, line color indicates sender cell .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

39 

SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURES 

Supplemental Figure 1: (A) Superimposed Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) of all 

conditions and time points. (B) Standard quality control thresholds for unique genes/cell (upper left), unique 

molecular identifiers/cell (upper right), mitochondrial percentage ( lower left), and ribosomal percentage (lower 

right). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

40 

Supplemental Figure 2: Relative incoming (A) and outgoing (B) signaling strength of fibroblast, AT1, AT2, 

and AMs quantified longitudinally. 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint 41 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint 42 

Supplemental Figure 3: (A) Longitudinal UMAP of lung macrophage subsets during resolution. Red circle 

encompasses FAM cell population. (B) Feature plot of lung macrophage subsets displaying relative 

expression of Trem2, Spp1, and Fabp5. (C) GSEA of macrophage subsets for “signaling by GPCR” parent 

reactome pathway. (D) GSEA of “signaling by WNT” parent reactome pathway i n FAM s (top) and TRAMs 

(bottom). (E) Violin plots displaying relative transcript expression of Adora 1, 2a, 2b, and 3 longitudinally. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

43 

Supplemental Figure 4: (A) Feature plot of tdTomato expression among all lung cell types. (B) Feature plot 

of lung mesenchymal subsets displaying relative expression of Csmd1, Spp1, and Ltbp2. (C) Violin plot 

displaying relative presence of “ECM secreting” fibroblast subtype lon gitudinally within peribronchial cells 

defined by the feature plot in B. (D) Longitudinal GSEA of selected pathways within alveolar and adventitial 

fibroblast subtypes. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

44 

Supplemental Figure 5: (A) Feature plot of Cldn4, Sfn, and KRT8 expression to identify transitional epithelial 

cell population (red circle). Longitudinal GSEA of top pathways in transitional (B), AT1 cells (C), and AT2 cells 

(D). 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint 45 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint 46 

Supplemental Figure 6: (A) Dot plot depicting relative incoming and outgoing interaction strength the 

indicated cell types in control and bleomycin treated mice at each time point. (B) Waterfall plots displaying 

relative enrichment of the indicated pathways. Each plot compares a condition or timepoint (control – left, day 

42 bleo – middle, day 63 bleo – right) to day 21 bleo -treated mice. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint

47 

Supplemental Figure 7: Alluvial plots of outgoing gene patterns for the indicated cell types (left) and genes 

that define each pattern (right) in control (A), day 21 bleo (B), day 42 bleo (C), and day 63 bleo (D). 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint 48 

Supplemental Figure 8: Circos plots displaying longitudinal cellular cross -talk of the indicated pathways. 

Line thickness is proportional to signaling strength, line color indicates sender cell. 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint 49 

Supplemental Figure 9: Violin plots displaying relative longitudinal Cd74 transcript expression in TRAMs (A), 

FAM s (B), and IMs ( C). 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint 50 

Supplemental Table 1: List of top enriched genes that define each outgoing gene pattern derived from 

alluvial plots in Supplemental Figure 7. 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint 51 

Supplemental Table 2: Longitudinal gene pattern identity for each cell type from alluvial plots in 

Supplemental Figure 7. 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.06.716772 doi: bioRxiv preprint